Lewis, David K. (1986) 
On the Plurality of Worlds 
Oxford: Blackwell 
ISBN: 9780631224266 
ISBN10: 0631224262 

Preface vii-ix 

1 A Philosophers' Paradise 

1.1 The Thesis of Plurality of Worlds 1 

1.2 Modal Realism at Work: Modality 5 

1.3 Modal Realism at Work: Closeness 20 

1.4 Modal Realism at Work: Content 27 

1.5 Modal Realism at Work: Properties 50 
1.6 Isolation 69 
1.7 Concreteness 81 
1.8 Plenitude 86 
1.9 Actuality 92 

2 Paradox in Paradise? 

2.1 Everything is Actual? 97 

2.2 All Worlds in One? 101 

2.3 More Worlds Than There Are? 104 

2.4 How Can We Know? 108 

2.5 A Road to Scepticism? 115 

2.6 A Road to Indifference? 123 

2.7 Arbitrariness Lost? 128 

2.8 The Incredulous Stare 133 

3 Paradise on the Cheap? 

3.1 The Ersatzist Programme 136 

3.2 Linguistic Ersatzism 142 

3.3 Pictorial Ersatzism 165 

3.4 Magical Ersatzism 174 

4 Counterparts or Double Lives? 

4.1 Good Questions and Bad 192 

4.2 Against Overlap 198 

4.3 Against Trans-World Individuals 210 

4.4 Against Haecceitism 220 

4.5 Against Constancy 248 

Works Cited 264 

Index 271-6 


Preface 

This book defends modal realism: the thesis that the world we are part of 
is but one of a plurality of worlds, and that we who inhabit this world are 
only a few out of all the inhabitants of all the worlds. 

I begin the first chapter by reviewing the many ways in which 
systematic philosophy goes more easily if we may presuppose modal 
realism in our analyses. I take this to be a good reason to think that modal 
realism is true, just as the utility of set theory in mathematics is a good 
reason to believe that there are sets. Then I state some tenets of the kind 
of modal realism I favour. 

In the second chapter, I reply to numerous objections. First I consider 
arguments that modal realism leads to contradiction; and I reply by 
rejecting some premises that are needed to produce the paradoxes. Then I 
turn to arguments that modal realism leads to consistent but unwelcome 
views: inductive scepticism, a disregard for prudence and morality, or the 
loss of the brute arbitrariness of our world; and again I reply by finding 
premises to reject. Finally I consider the sheer implausibility of a theory 
so much at variance with commonsensical ideas about what there is; I 
take this to be a fair and serious objection, but outweighed by the 
systematic benefits that acceptance of modal realism brings. 

In the third chapter, I consider the prospect that a more credible 
ontology might yield the same benefits: the programme of ersatz modal 
realism, in which other worlds are to be replaced by 'abstract' 
representations thereof. I advance objections against several versions of 
this programme. I urge that we must distinguish the different versions, 
since they are subject to different objections; it will not do to dodge 
trouble by favouring abstract ersatz worlds in the abstract, without giving 
any dentine account of them. 

In the fourth and final chapter, I consider the so-called 'problem of 
trans-world identity. I divide it into several questions, some of them good 


viii Preface 

and some of them confused, and I compare my counterpart-theoretic 
approach with some alternatives. 

Nowhere in this book will you find an argument that you must accept the 
position I favour because there is no alternative. I believe that 
philosophers who offer such arguments are almost never successful, and 
philosophers who demand them are misguided. I give some reasons that 
favour my position over some of its close alternatives. But I do not think 
that these reasons are conclusive; I may well have overlooked some close 
alternatives; and I do not discuss more distant alternatives at all. For 
instance, I do not make any case against a hard-line actualism that rejects 
any sort of quantification over possibilities. You will find it easy enough 
to guess why I would not favour that view; I have nothing new, and 
nothing conclusive, to say against it; so it would serve no purpose to 
discuss it. 

It may come as a surprise that this book on possible worlds also contains 
no discussion of the views of Leibniz. Is it that I consider him unworthy 
of serious attention? - Not at all. But when I read what serious historians 
of philosophy have to say, I am persuaded that it is no easy matter to 
know what his views were. It would be nice to have the right sort of 
talent and training to join in the work of exegesis, but it is very clear to 
me that I do not. Anything I might say about Leibniz would be 
amateurish, undeserving of others' attention, and better left unsaid. 

About twelve years ago, I gave my thesis a bad name. I called it 'modal 
realism'. Had I foreseen present-day discussions of what 'realism' really 
is, I would certainly have called it something else. As it is, I think it best 
to stick with the old name. But I must insist that my modal realism is 
simply the thesis that there are other worlds, and individuals inhabiting 
these worlds; and that these are of a certain nature, and suited to play 
certain theoretical roles. It is an existential claim, not unlike the claim I 
would be making if I said that there were Loch Ness monsters, or Red 
moles in the CIA, or counterexamples to Fermat's conjecture, or 
seraphim. It is not a thesis about our semantic competence, or about the 
nature of truth, or about bivalence, or about the limits of our knowledge. 
For me, the question is of the existence of objects - not the objectivity of 
a subject matter. 

At many points, I am greatly indebted to friends who have helped me by 
discussion or correspondence about topics covered in this book: 
especially Robert M. Adams, D. M. Armstrong, John G. Bennett, John 
Bigelow, Philip Bricker, M. J. Cresswell, Peter Forrest, Allen Hazen, 
Mark Johnston, David Kaplan, Saul Kripke, Robert Stalnaker, Pavel 
Tichý and Peter van Inwagen. 


Preface ix 

Part of this book was delivered as the John Locke Lectures at the 
University of Oxford in Trinity Term, 1984. I am most honoured by 
Oxford's invitation; and I am most grateful to Oxford for providing me 
with the occasion to write on modal realism more fully than I had done 
before, and also with a much-needed deadline. I am grateful to Princeton 
University for sabbatical Ieave, and to the National Endowment for the 
Humanities for financial assistance during the year in which most of this 
book was written. 


1A Philosophers' Paradise1.1 The Thesis of Plurality of WorldsThe world we live in is a very inclusive thing. Every stick and every stoneyou have ever seen is part of it. And so are you and I. And so are theplanet Earth, the solar system, the entire Milky Way, the remote galaxieswe see through telescopes, and (if there are such things) all the bits ofempty space between the stars and galaxies. There is nothing so far awayfrom us as not to be part of our world. Anything at any distance at allis to be included. Likewise the world is inclusive in time. No long-goneancient Romans, no long-gone pterodactyls, no long-gone primordialclouds of plasma are too far in the past, nor are the dead dark stars toofar in the future, to be part of this same world. Maybe, as I myself think,
the world is a big physical object; or maybe some parts of it are entelechiesor spirits or auras or deities or other things unknown to physics. Butnothing is so alien in kind as not to be part of our world, provided onlythat it does exist at some distance and direction from here, or at sometime before or after or simultaneous with now.
The way things are, at its most inclusive, means the way this entireworld is. But things might have been different, in ever so many ways.
This book of mine might have been finished on schedule. Or, had I notbeen such a commonsensical chap, I might be defending not only aplurality of possible worlds, but also a plurality of impossible worlds,
whereof you speak truly by contradicting yourself. Or I might not haveexisted at all - neither I myself, nor any counterpart of me. Or there mightnever have been any people. Or the physical constants might have hadsomewhat different values, incompatible with the emergence of life. Orthere might have been altogether different laws of nature; and insteadof electrons and quarks, there might have been alien particles, withoutcharge or mass or spin but with alien physical properties that nothing

2A Philosophers' Paradisein this world shares. There are ever so many ways that a world mightbe; and one of these many ways is the way that this world is.
Are there other worlds that are other ways? I say there are. I advocatea thesis of plurality of worlds, or modal realism,' which holds that ourworld is but one world among many. There are countless other worlds,
other very inclusive things. Our world consists of us and all oursurroundings, however remote in time and space; just as it is one big thinghaving lesser things as parts, so likewise do other worlds have lesser other-
worldly things as parts. The worlds are something like remote planets;
except that most of them are much bigger than mere planets, and theyare not remote. Neither are they nearby. They are not at any spatialdistance whatever from here. They are not far in the past or future, norfor that matter near; they are not at any temporal distance whatever fromnow. They are isolated: there are no spatiotemporal relations at all betweenthings that belong to different worlds. Nor does anything that happensat one world cause anything to happen at another. Nor do they overlap;
they have no parts in common, with the exception, perhaps, of immanentuniversals exercising their characteristic privilege of repeated occurrence.
The worlds are many and varied. There are enough of them to affordworlds where (roughly speaking) I finish on schedule, or I write on behalfof impossibilia, or I do not exist, or there are no people at all, or thephysical constants do not permit life, or totally different laws govern thedoings of alien particles with alien properties. There are so many otherworlds, in fact, that absolutely every way that a world could possiblybe is a way that some world is. And as with worlds, so it is with partsof worlds. There are ever so many ways that a part of a world could be;
and so many and so varied are the other worlds that absolutely everyway that a part of a world could possibly be is a way that some part ofsome world is.
The other worlds are of a kind with this world of ours. To be sure,
there are differences of kind between things that are parts of differentworlds - one world has electrons and another has none, one has spiritsand another has none - but these differences of kind are no more thansometimes arise between things that are parts of one single world, forinstance in a world where electrons coexist with spirits. The differencebetween this and the other worlds is not a categorial difference.
Nor does this world differ from the others in its manner of existing.
I do not have the slightest idea what a difference in manner of existingis supposed to be. Some things exist here on earth, other things existextraterrestrially, perhaps some exist no place in particular; but that isno difference in manner of existing, merely a difference in location or'Or 'extreme' modal realism, as Stalnaker calls it — but in what dimension does itsextremity lie?

The Thesis of Plurality of Worlds3lack of it between things that exist. Likewise some things exist here atour world, others exist at other worlds; again, I take this to be a differencebetween things that exist, not a difference in their existing. You mightsay that strictly speaking, only this-worldly things really exist; and I amready enough to agree; but on my view this 'strict' speaking is restrictedspeaking, on a par with saying that all the beer is in the fridge and ignoringmost of all the beer there is. When we quantify over less than all thereis, we leave out things that (unrestrictedly speaking) exist simpliciter. IfI am right, other-worldly things exist simpliciter, though often it is verysensible to ignore them and quantify restrictedly over our worldmates.
And if I am wrong, other-worldly things fail simpliciter to exist. Theyexist, as the Russell set does, only according to a false theory. That isnot to exist in some inferior manner - what exists only according to somefalse theory just does not exist at all.
The worlds are not of our own making. It may happen that one partof a world makes other parts, as we do; and as other-worldly gods anddemiurges do on a grander scale. But if worlds are causally isolated,
nothing outside a world ever makes a world; and nothing inside makesthe whole of a world, for that would be an impossible kind of self-
causation. We make languages and concepts and descriptions andimaginary representations that apply to worlds. We make stipulationsthat select some worlds rather than others for our attention. Some ofus even make assertions to the effect that other worlds exist. But noneof these things we make are the worlds themselves.
Why believe in a plurality of worlds? - Because the hypothesis isserviceable, and that is a reason to think that it is true. The familiar analysisof necessity as truth at all possible worlds was only the beginning. Inthe last two decades, philosophers have offered a great many more analysesthat make reference to possible worlds, or to possible individuals thatinhabit possible worlds. I find that record most impressive. I think it isclear that talk of possibilia has clarified questions in many parts of thephilosophy of logic, of mind, of language, and of science - not to mentionmetaphysics itself. Even those who officially scoff often cannot resistthe temptation to help themselves abashedly to this useful way of speaking.
Hilbert called the set-theoretical universe a paradise for mathematicians.
And he was right (though perhaps it was not he who should have saidit). We have only to believe in the vast hierarchy of sets, and there wefind entities suited to meet the needs of all the branches of mathematics;2and we find that the very meagre primitive vocabulary of set theory,
definitionally extended, suffices to meet our needs for mathematical2With the alleged exception of category theory - but here I wonder if the unmet needshave more to do with the motivational talk than with the real mathematics.

4A Philosophers' Paradisepredicates; and we find that the meagre axioms of set theory are firstprinciples enough to yield the theorems that are the content of the subject.
Set theory offers the mathematician great economy of primitives andpremises, in return for accepting rather a lot of entities unknown 'to Homojavanensis. It offers an improvement in what Quine calls ideology, paidfor in the coin of ontology. It's an offer you can't refuse. The price isright; the benefits in theoretical unity and economy are well worth theentities. Philosophers might like to see the subject reconstructed orreconstrued; but working mathematicians insist on pursuing their subjectin paradise, and will not be driven out. Their thesis of plurality of setsis fruitful; that gives them good reason to believe that it is true.
Good reason; I do not say it is conclusive. Maybe the price is higherthan it seems because set theory has unacceptable hidden implications -
maybe the next round of set-theoretical paradoxes will soon be upon us.
Maybe the very idea of accepting controversial ontology for the sake oftheoretical benefits is misguided - so a sceptical epistemologist might say,
to which I reply that mathematics is better known than any premise ofsceptical epistemology. Or perhaps some better paradise might be found.
Some say that mathematics might be pursued in a paradise of possibilia,
full of unactualised idealisations of things around us, or of things wedo - if so, the parallel with mathematics serves my purpose better thanever! Conceivably we might find some way to accept set theory, just asis and just as nice a home for mathematics, without any ontologicalcommitment to sets. But even if such hopes come true, my point remains.
It has been the judgement of mathematicians, which modest philosophersought to respect, that if that is indeed the choice before us, then it is worthbelieving in vast realms of controversial entities for the sake of enoughbenefit in unity and economy of theory.
As the realm of sets is for mathematicians, so logical space is a paradisefor philosophers. We have only to believe in the vast realm of possibilia,
and there we find what we need to advance our endeavours. We find thewherewithal to reduce the diversity of notions we must accept as primitive,
and thereby to improve the unity and economy of the theory that is ourprofessional concern - total theory, the whole of what we take to be true.
What price paradise? If we want the theoretical benefits that talk ofpossibilia brings, the most straightforward way to gain honest title tothem is to accept such talk as the literal truth. It is my view that the priceis right, if less spectacularly so than in the mathematical parallel. Thebenefits are worth their ontological cost. Modal realism is fruitful; thatgives us good reason to believe that it is true.
Good reason; I do not say it is conclusive. Maybe the theoretical benefitsto be gained are illusory, because the analyses that use possibilia do notsucceed on their own terms. Maybe the price is higher than it seems,
because modal realism has unacceptable hidden implications. Maybe the

Modal Realism at Work: Modality5price is not right; even if I am right about what theoretical benefits canbe had for what ontological cost, maybe those benefits just are not worththose costs. Maybe the very idea of accepting controversial ontology forthe sake of theoretical benefits is misguided. Maybe - and this is the doubtthat most interests me - the benefits are not worth the cost, because theycan be had more cheaply elsewhere. Some of these doubts are toocomplicated to address here, or too simple to address at all; others willcome in for discussion in the course of this book.
1.2 Modal Realism at Work: ModalityIn the next four sections, I consider what possible worlds and individualsare good for. Even a long discussion might be too short to convince allreaders that the applications I have in mind are workable at all, still lessthat approaches employing possibilia are superior to all conceivable rivals.
(Still less that possibilia are absolutely indispensable, something I don'tbelieve myself.) Each application could have a book of its own. HereI shall settle for less.
The best known application is to modality. Presumably, whatever it maymean to call a world actual (see section 1.9), it had better turn out thatthe world we are part of is the actual world. What actually is the case,
as we say, is what goes on here. That is one possible way for a worldto be. Other worlds are other, that is unactualised, possibilities. If thereare many worlds, and every way that a world could possibly be is a waythat some world is, then whenever such-and-such might be the case, thereis some world where such-and-such is the case. Conversely, since it issafe to say that no world is any way that a world could not possibly be,
whenever there is some world at which such-and-such is the case, thenit might be that such-and-such is the case. So modality turns intoquantification: possibly there are blue swans iff, for some world W, atW there are blue swans.
But not just quantification: there is also the phrase 'at W' which appearswithin the scope of the quantifier, and which needs explaining. It worksmainly by restricting the domains of quantifiers in its scope, in muchthe same way that the restricting modifier 'in Australia' does. In Australia,
all swans are black - all swans are indeed black, if we ignore everythingnot in Australia; quantifying only over things in Australia, all swans areblack. At some strange world W, all swans are blue - all swans are indeedblue, if we ignore everything not part of the world W'; quantifying onlyover things that are part of W, all swans are blue.
Such modifiers have various other effects. For one thing, they influencethe interpretation of expressions that are not explicitly quantificational,

6A Philosophers' Paradisebut that reveal implicit quantification under analysis: definite descriptionsand singular terms definable by them, class abstracts and plurals,
superlatives, etc. An example: it is the case at world W that ninenumbers the solar planets iff nine numbers those solar planets thatare part of W. Another example: words like 'invent' and 'discover' areimplicitly superlative, hence implicitly quantificational; they implydoing something first, before anyone else did. So the inventor ofbifocals at W is the one who is part of W and thought of bifocals beforeanyone else who is part of W did. For another thing, besides restrictingexplicit or implicit quantifiers, our modifiers can restrict proper names.
In Australia, and likewise at a possible world where the counterpartsof British cities are strangely rearranged, Cardiff is a suburb of Newcastle -
there are various places of those names, and we banish ambiguityby restricting our attention to the proper domain. Here I am supposingthat the way we bestow names attaches them not only to this-worldlythings, but also to other-worldly counterparts thereof. That is howthe other-worldly Cardiffs and Newcastles bear those names in ourthis-worldly language. In the same way, the solar planets at W are thosethat orbit the star Sol of the world W, a counterpart of the Sol ofthis world. Natural language being complex, doubtless I have not listedall the effects of our modifiers. But I believe the principle will alwaysstay the same: whatever they do, they do it by instructing us, withinlimits, to take account only of things that are part of a limited domain -
the domain of things in Australia, or the domain of parts of a certainworld.
Two qualifications concerning our restrictive modifiers. (1) I do notsuppose that they must restrict all quantifiers in their scope, withoutexception. 'In Australia, there is a yacht faster than any other' wouldmean less than it does if the modifier restricted both quantifiers ratherthan just the first. 'Nowadays there are rulers more dangerous than anyancient Roman' would be trivialised if we ignored those ancient Romanswho are not alive nowadays. 'At some small worlds, there is a naturalnumber too big to measure any class of individuals' can be true even ifthe large number that makes it true is no part of the small world. (2)
Of course there will usually be other restrictions as well; doubtless weare already ignoring various immigrant swans and their descendants, andalso whatever freak or painted swans there may be in Australia or amongthe parts of world W, so our modifier 'in Australia' or 'at W' adds morerestrictions to the ones already in force. In short, while our modifierstend to impose restrictions on quantifiers, names, etc., a lot is left upto the pragmatic rule that what is said should be interpreted so as to besensible. If that means adding extra tacit restrictions, or waiving someof the restrictions imposed by our modifiers, then - within limits -
so be it.3

Modal Realism at Work: Modality7As possibility amounts to existential quantification over the worlds,
with restricting modifiers inside the quantifiers, so necessity amounts touniversal quantification. Necessarily all swans are birds iff, for any worldW, quantifying only over parts of W, all swans are birds. More simply:
iff all swans, no matter what world they are part of, are birds. The othermodalities follow suit. What is impossible is the case at no worlds; whatis contingent is the case at some but not at others.
More often than not, modality is restricted quantification; and restrictedfrom the standpoint of a given world, perhaps ours, by means of so-called`accessibility' relations. Thus it is nomologically necessary, though notunrestrictedly necessary, that friction produces heat: at every world thatobeys the laws of our world, friction produces heat. It is contingent whichworld is ours; hence what are the laws of our world; hence which worldsare nomologically 'accessible' from ours; hence what is true throughoutthese worlds, i.e. what is nomologically necessary.
Likewise it is historically necessary, now as I write these words, thatmy book is at least partly written: at every world that perfectly matchesours up to now, and diverges only later if ever, the book is at least partlywritten.
3This discussion of restricting modifiers enables me to say why I have no use forimpossible worlds, on a par with the possible worlds. For comparison, suppose travellerstold of a place in this world - a marvellous mountain, far away in the bush - wherecontradictions are true. Allegedly we have truths of the form 'On the mountain both Pand not P'. But if 'on the mountain' is a restricting modifier, which works by limitingdomains of implicit and explicit quantification to a certain part of all that there is, thenit has no effect on the truth-functional connectives. Then the order of modifier andconnectives makes no difference. So 'On the mountain both P and Q' is equivalent to`On the mountain P, and on the mountain Q'; likewise 'On the mountain not P' is equivalentto 'Not: on the mountain P'; putting these together, the alleged truth 'On the mountainboth P and not P' is equivalent to the overt contradiction 'On the mountain P, and not:
on the mountain P'. That is, there is no difference between a contradiction within thescope of the modifier and a plain contradiction that has the modifier within it. So to tellthe alleged truth about the marvellously contradictory things that happen on the mountainis no different from contradicting yourself. But there is no subject matter, howevermarvellous, about which you can tell the truth by contradicting yourself. Therefore thereis no mountain where contradictions are true. An impossible world where contradictionsare true would be no better. The alleged truth about its contradictory goings-on woulditself be contradictory. At least, that is so if I am right that 'at so-and-so world' is arestricting modifier. Other modifiers are another story. 'According to the Bible' or 'Fredsays that' are not restricting modifiers; they do not pass through the truth-functionalconnectives. 'Fred says that not P' and 'Not: Fred says that P' are independent: both,
either, or neither might be true. If worlds were like stories or story-tellers, there wouldindeed be room for worlds according to which contradictions are true. The sad truth aboutthe prevarications of these worlds would not itself be contradictory. But worlds, as Iunderstand them, are not like stories or story-tellers. They are like this world; and thisworld is no story, not even a true story. Nor should worlds be replaced by their stories,
for reasons discussed in section 3.2.

8A Philosophers' ParadisePutting together nomological and historical accessibility restrictions,
we get the proper treatment of predetermination - a definition free ofred herrings about what can in principle be known and computed, or aboutthe analysis of causation. It was predetermined at his creation that Adamwould sin iff he does so at every world that both obeys the laws of ourworld and perfectly matches the history of our world up through themoment of Adam's creation.
As other worlds are alternative possibilities for an entire world, so theparts of other worlds are alternative possibilities for lesser individuals.
Modality de re, the potentiality and essence of things, is quantificationover possible individuals. As quantification over possible worlds iscommonly restricted by accessibility relations, so quantification overpossible individuals is commonly restricted by counterpart relations. Inboth cases, the restrictive relations usually involve similarity. Anomologically or historically accessible world is similar to our world inthe laws it obeys, or in its history up to some time. Likewise a counterpartof Oxford is similar to Oxford in its origins, or in its location vis-a-vis(counterparts of) other places, or in the arrangement and nature of itsparts, or in the role it plays in the life of a nation or a discipline. ThusOxford might be noted more for the manufacture of locomotives thanof motor cars, or might have been a famous centre for the study ofparaconsistent hermeneutics, iff some other-worldly counterpart of ourOxford, under some suitable counterpart relation, enjoys thesedistinctions.
Sometimes one hears a short list of the restricted modalities:
nomological, historical, epistemic, deontic, maybe one or two more. Andsometimes one is expected to take a position, once and for all, about whatis or isn't possible de re for an individual. I would suggest instead thatthe restricting of modalities by accessibility or counterpart relations, likethe restricting of quantifiers generally, is a very fluid sort of affair:
inconstant, somewhat indeterminate, and subject to instant change inresponse to contextual pressures. Not anything goes, but a great deal does.
And to a substantial extent, saying so makes it so: if you say what wouldonly be true under certain restrictions, and your conversational partnersacquiesce, straightway those restrictions come into force.'
The standard language of modal logic provides just two modal expressions:
the diamond, read as 'possibly', and the box, read as 'necessarily'. Bothare sentential operators: they attach to sentences to make sentences, or4See section 4.5; Kratzer, 'What "Must" and "Can" Must and Can Mean'; and my• `Scorekeeping in a Language Game'.

Modal Realism at Work: Modality9to open formulas to make open formulas. So a modal logician will write0 for some x, x is a swan and x is blueto mean that possibly some swan is blue, i.e. that there might be a blueswan; orE for all x, if x is a swan then x is a birdto mean that necessarily all swans are birds. Likewisex is blueis a formula satisfied by anything that could possibly be blue, andE x is a birdis a formula satisfied by anything that must necessarily be a bird. Whenthey attach to sentences we can take the diamond and the box asquantifiers, often restricted, over possible worlds. How to take them whenthey attach to open formulas — sentential expressions with unboundvariables — is more questionable.
A simple account would be that in that case also they are just quantifiersover worlds. But that raises a question. Start with something that is partof this world: Hubert Humphrey, say. He might have won the presidencybut didn't, so he satisfies the modal formula 'possibly x wins' but notthe formula 'x wins'. Taking the diamond 'possibly' as a quantifier overworlds, (perhaps restricted, but let me ignore that), that means that thereis some world W such that, at W, he satisfies 'x wins'. But how doeshe do that if he isn't even part of W?
You might reply that he is part of W as well as part of this world. Ifthis means that the whole of him is part of W, I reject that for reasonsto be given in section 4.2; if it means that part of him is part of W, Ireject that for reasons to be given in section 4.3. Then to save the simpleaccount, we have to say that Humphrey needn't be part of a world tosatisfy formulas there; there is a world where somehow he satisfies 'xwins' in absentia.
We might prefer a more complex account of how modal operatorswork .5 We might say that when 'possibly' is attached to open formulas,
it is a quantifier not just over worlds but also over other-worldlycounterparts of this-worldly individuals; so that Humphrey satisfies=This is essentially the account I gave in 'Counterpart Theory and Quantified ModalLogic'.

10A Philosophers' Paradise`possibly x wins' iff, for some world W, for some counterpart ofHumphrey in W, that counterpart satisfies 'x wins' at W. The satisfactionof 'x wins' by the counterpart is unproblematic. Now we need nosatisfaction in absentia.
The simple and complex accounts are not in competition. Both doequally well, because there is a counterpart-theoretic account ofsatisfaction in absentia that makes them come out equivalent. Satisfactionin absentia is vicarious satisfaction: Humphrey satisfies 'x wins' vicariouslyat any world where he has a winning counterpart. Then according to bothaccounts alike, he satisfies 'possibly x wins' iff at some world he has acounterpart who wins.
The box and diamond are interdefinable: 'necessarily' means 'notpossibly not'. So what I have said for one carries over to the other.
According to the simple account, Humphrey satisfies the modal formula`necessarily x is human' iff it is not the case that there is some worldW such that, at W, he satisfies 'x is not human'; that is, iff at no worlddoes he satisfy - in absentia or otherwise - x is not human'. Accordingto the complex account, Humphrey satisfies 'necessarily x is human' iffit is not the case that for some world W, for some counterpart ofHumphrey in W, that counterpart satisfies 'x is not human' at W; thatis, iff there is no counterpart in any world of Humphrey who satisfies`x is not human'. Taking satisfaction in absentia to be vicarious satisfactionthrough a counterpart, the simple and complex accounts again agree:
Humphrey satisfies 'necessarily x is human' iff he has no non-humancounterpart at any world.
(It is plausible enough that Humphrey has no non-human counterpart.
Or, if I am right to say that counterpart relations are an inconstant andindeterminate affair, at any rate it is plausible enough that there is somereasonable counterpart relation under which Humphrey has no non-humancounterpart - so let's fix on such a counterpart relation for the sake ofthe example.)
The alert or informed reader will know that if what I've said abouthow Humphrey satisfies modal formulas sounds right, that is only becauseI took care to pick the right examples. A famous problem arises if insteadwe consider whether Humphrey satisfies modal formulas having to dowith the contingency of his existence. According to what I've said, beit in the simple or the complex formulation, Humphrey satisfies`necessarily x exists' and fails to satisfy 'possibly x does not exist' iff hehas no counterpart at any world W who does not exist at W. But whatcan it mean to say that the counterpart is 'at W' if not that, at W, thecounterpart exists?6 So it seems that Humphrey does satisfy 'necessarily6We might just say it, and not mean anything by it. That is Forbes's solution to ourpresent difficulty, in his so-called 'canonical counterpart theory' - my own version is

Modal Realism at Work: Modality11x exists' and doesn't satisfy 'possibly x does not exist'. That is wrong.
For all his virtues, still it really will not do to elevate Humphrey to theranks of the Necessary Beings.
What I want to say, of course, is that Humphrey exists necessarily iffat every world he has some counterpart, which he doesn't; he has thepossibility of not existing iff at some world he lacks a counterpart, whichhe does. It's all very well to say this; but the problem is to square it withmy general account of the satisfaction of modal formulas.
So shall we give a revised account of the satisfaction of modal formulas?
Should we say that Humphrey satisfies 'necessarily Ox' iff at every worldhe has some counterpart who satisfies 'Ox'? Then, by the interdefinabilityof box and diamond, Humphrey satisfies 'possibly x is a cat' iff it is notthe case that at every world he has some counterpart who satisfies 'notx is a cat'; and indeed that is not the case, since at some worlds he hasno counterparts at all; so it seems that he does satisfy 'possibly x is acat' even if he has not a single cat among his counterparts! This is noimprovement. What next?
Shall we dump the method of counterparts? — That wouldn't help,
because we can recreate the problem in a far more neutral framework.
Let us suppose only this much. (1) We want to treat the modal operatorssimply as quantifiers over worlds. (2) We want to grant that Humphreysomehow satisfies various formulas at various other worlds, never mindhow he does it. (3) We want it to come out that he satisfies the modalformula 'necessarily x is human', since that seems to be the way to saysomething true, namely that he is essentially human. (4) We want it tocome out that he satisfies the modal formula 'possibly x does not exist',
since that seems to be the way to say something else true, namely thathe might not have existed. (5) We want it to come out that he does notsatisfy the model formula 'possibly x is human and x does not exist' sincethat seems to be the way to say something false, namely that he mighthave been human without even existing. So he satisfies `x is human' atall worlds and `x does not exist' at some worlds; so he satisfies both ofthem at some worlds; yet though he satisfies both conjuncts he doesn'tsatisfy their conjunction! How can that be?
hereby named 'official standard counterpart theory' - in which, if Humphrey has noordinary counterpart among the things which exist at W, he does nevertheless have acounterpart at W. This extraordinary counterpart is none other than Humphrey himself -
he then gets in as a sort of associate member of W's population, belonging to its 'outerdomain' but not to the 'inner domain' of things that exist there fair and square. Thisisn't explained, but really it needn't be. It amounts to a stipulation that there are twodifferent ways that Humphrey - he himself, safe at home in this world - can satisfy formulasin absentia. Where he has proper counterparts, he does it one way, namely the ordinaryvicarious way. Where he doesn't, he does it another way - just by not being there he satisfies`x does not exist'.

12A Philosophers' ParadiseThere might be a fallacy of equivocation. Maybe what it means forHumphrey to satisfy a formula in absentia is different in the case ofdifferent kinds of formulas, or in the case of different kinds of worlds.
Maybe, for instance, he can satisfy 'x does not exist' at a world by nothaving a counterpart there; but to satisfy 'x is human' at a world he hasto have a counterpart there who is human, and to satisfy 'x is humanand x does not exist' he would have to have one who was human andyet did not exist. Or maybe the language is uniformly ambiguous, anddifferent cases invite different disambiguations. Either way, that woulddisappoint anyone who hopes that the language of quantified modal logicwill be a well-behaved formal language, free of ambiguity and free ofdevious semantic rules that work different ways in different cases.
Or maybe the satisfying of modal formulas does not always mean whatwe would intuitively take it to mean after we learn how to pronouncethe box and diamond. Maybe, for instance, saying that Humphrey satisfies`necessarily x is human' is not the right way to say that he is essentiallyhuman. That would disappoint anyone who hopes that the language ofboxes and diamonds affords a good regimentation of our ordinary modalthought.
Whichever it is, the friend of boxes and diamonds is in for adisappointment. He can pick his disappointment to suit himself. He canlay down uniform and unambiguous semantic rules for a regimentedformal language - and re-educate his intuitions about how to translatebetween that language and ordinary modal talk. He can discipline himself,
for instance, never to say 'necessarily human' when he means 'essentiallyhuman'; but instead, always to say 'necessarily such that it is human ifit exists'. Alternatively, he can build his language more on the patternof what we ordinarily say - and equip it either with outright ambiguities,
or else with devious rules that look at what a formula says before theyknow what it means to satisfy it.7What is the correct counterpart-theoretic interpretation of the modalformulas of the standard language of quantified modal logic? - Whocares? We can make them mean whatever we like. We are their master.
We needn't be faithful to the meanings we learned at mother's knee -
because we didn't. If this language of boxes and diamonds proves to bea clumsy instrument for talking about matters of essence and potentiality,
7 If he likes, he can give himself more than one of these disappointments. As I noted,
Forbes's talk of non-existent counterparts in outer domains amounts to a stipulation thatsatisfaction in absentia works different ways in different cases; so I find it strange thathe offers it in rejoinder to a proposal of Hunter and Seager that modal formulas of parallelform needn't always be given parallel counterpart-theoretic translations. But this dividedtreatment does not pay off by making the modal formulas mean what we would offhandexpect them to — it is exactly the non-existent counterparts in the outer domains that keepHumphrey from satisfying 'necessarily x is human' even if he is essentially human.

Modal Realism at Work: Modality13let it go hang. Use the resources of modal realism directly to say whatit would mean for Humphrey to be essentially human, or to existcontingently.
In any case, modality is not all diamonds and boxes. Ordinary languagehas modal idioms that outrun the resources of standard modal logic,
though of course you will be able to propose extensions. Allen Hazenmentions several examples of this in his 'Expressive Completeness in ModalLanguages' . But let me mention some more.
There is what I take to be numerical quantification: it might happenin three different ways that a donkey talks iff three possible individuals,
very different from one another, are donkeys that talk. It scarcely seemspossible to cover the entire infinite family of numerical sodalities unlesswe resort to the pre-existing apparatus of numerical quaidtification. Thenwe need some entities to be the 'ways' that we quantify over. Mycandidates are the possible worlds and individuals themselves, or else setsof these.
There are modalised comparatives: a red thing could resemble an orangething more closely than a red thing could resemble a blue thing. I analysethat as a quantified statement of comparative resemblance involvingcoloured things which may be parts of different worlds.
For some x and y (x is red and y is orange andfor all u and v (if u is red and v is blue, thenx resembles y more than u resembles v))
Try saying that in standard modal logic. The problem is that formulasget evaluated relative to a world, which leaves no room for cross-worldcomparisons.
Maybe you can solve the problem if you replace the original comparativerelation . . resembles . . . more than . . . resembles . . .' by some fancyanalysis of it, say in terms of numerical measures of degrees of resemblanceand numerical inequalities of these degrees. After that, you might be ableto do the rest with boxes and diamonds. The fancy analysis might becorrect. But still, I suggest that your solution is no fair. For that's nothow the English does it. The English does not introduce degrees ofresemblance. It sticks with the original comparative relation, and modalisesit with the auxiliary 'could' . But this 'could' does not behave like thestandard sentence-modifying diamond, making a sentence which is trueif the modified sentence could be true. I think its effect is to unrestrictquantifiers which would normally range over thisn-worldly things. Themoral for me is that we'd better have other-worldly things to quantifyover. I suppose the moral for a friend of primitive modality is that he

14A Philosophers' Paradisehas more on his plate than he thinks he has: other primitive modal idiomsthan just his boxes and diamonds.
Another modal notion which is badly served by diamonds and boxes issupervenience. The idea is simple and easy: we have supervenience whenthere could be no difference of one sort without differences of anothersort. At least, this seems simple and easy enough; and yet in recentdiscussions8 we get an unlovely proliferation of non-equivalentdefinitions. Some stick close to the original idea but seem too weak; othersseem strong enough but out of touch with the original idea. A useful notionthreatens to fade away into confusion. I offer this diagnosis of the trouble.
There really is just one simple, easy, useful idea. However, it is unavailableto those who assume that all modality must come packaged in boxes anddiamonds. Therefore we get a plethora of unsatisfactory approximationsand substitutes.
To see why there is a problem about formulating supervenience theses,
we need a few examples. First, a fairly uncontroversial one. A dot-matrixpicture has global properties - it is symmetrical, it is cluttered, andwhatnot - and yet all there is to the picture is dots and non-dots at eachpoint of the matrix. The global properties are nothing but patterns inthe dots. They supervene: no two pictures could differ in their globalproperties without differing, somewhere, in whether there is or isn't a dot.
A second example is more controversial and interesting. The world hasits laws of nature, its chances and causal relationships; and yet - perhaps! -
all there is to the world is its point-by-point distribution of local qualitativecharacter. We have a spatiotemporal arrangement of points. At each pointvarious local intrinsic properties may be present, instantiated perhaps bythe point itself or perhaps by point-sized bits of matter or of fields thatare located there. There may be properties of mass, charge, quark colourand flavour, field strength, and the like; and maybe others besides, ifphysics as we know it is inadequate to its descriptive task. Is that all?
Are the laws, chances, and causal relationships nothing but patterns whichsupervene on this point-by-point distribution of properties? Could twoworlds differ in their laws without differing, somehow, somewhere, inlocal qualitative character? (I discuss this question of 'Humeansupervenience', inconclusively, in the Introduction to my PhilosophicalPapers, volume II.)
A third example. A person has a mental life of attitudes and experiencesand yet - perhaps! - all there is to him is an arrangement of physicalparticles, interacting in accordance with physical laws. Does the mentalsupervene on the physical? We can distinguish two questions. (1) Narrowpsychophysical supervenience: could two people differ mentally without8Surveyed in Teller, 'A Poor Man's Guide to Supervenience and Determination'.

Modal Realism at Work: Modality15also themselves differing physically? (2) Broad psychophysical super-
venience: could two people differ mentally without there being aphysical difference somewhere, whether in the people themselves orsomewhere in their surroundings? We can also distinguish questions inanother way, cross-cutting the distinction of narrow and broad, dependingon how restricted a range of possibilities we consider. If we restrictourselves to worlds that obey the actual laws of nature, then even a dualistmight accept some kind of psychophysical supervenience, if he believesin strict laws of psychophysical correlation. If we impose no restrictionat all, then even a staunch materialist might reject all kinds ofpsychophysical supervenience, if he takes materialism to be a contingenttruth. If we want to define materialism in terms of psychophysicalsupervenience, we will have to steer between these extremes.9Supervenience means that there could be no difference of the one sortwithout difference of the other sort. Clearly, this 'could' indicatesmodality. Without the modality we have nothing of interest. No two dot-
for-dot duplicate pictures differ in symmetry; they could not, and thatis why symmetry is nothing but a pattern in the arrangement of dots.
Maybe also it happens that no two dot-for-dot duplicate pictures differin their origins. But if so, that just means that a certain sort of coincidencehappens not to have occurred; it doesn't mean that the origin of a pictureis nothing but a pattern in the arrangement of dots. Dot-for-dot duplicatesperfectly well could come from different origins, whether or not they everactually do.
So we might read the 'could' as a diamond - a modal operator 'possibly'which modifies sentences. 'There could be no difference of the one sortwithout difference of the other sort' - read this to mean that it is not thecase that, possibly, there are two things which have a difference of theone sort without any difference of the other sort. That is: it is not thecase that there is some world W such that, at W, two things have adifference of the one sort but not the other. That is, taking 'at W' asusual as a restricting modifier: there is no world wherein two things havea difference of the one sort but not the other. Is this an adequate wayto formulate supervenience?
Sometimes it is. It will do well enough to state our supervenience thesesabout dot-matrix pictures. Symmetry (or whatnot) supervenes on thearrangement of the dots iff there is no world wherein two pictures differin symmetry without differing in their arrangement of dots. It will doalso to state narrow psychophysical supervenience: that thesis says thatthere is no world (or, none within a certain restriction) wherein two peoplediffer mentally without themselves differing physically. So far, so good.
9See Kim, Psychophysical Supervenience', and my 'New Work for a Theory ofUniversals'.

16A Philosophers' ParadiseBut sometimes the formulation with a diamond is not adequate. Westart to hit trouble with the thesis of broad psychophysical supervenience.
The idea is that the mental supervenes on the physical; however, thephysical pattern that is relevant to a given person's mental life might extendindefinitely far outside that person and into his surroundings. Then thethesis we want says that there could be no mental difference between twopeople without there being some physical difference, whether intrinsicor extrinsic, between them. Reading the 'could' as a diamond, the thesisbecomes this: there is no world (or, none within a certain restriction)
wherein two people differ mentally without there being some physicaldifference, intrinsic or extrinsic, between them. That is not quite right.
We have gratuitously limited our attention to physical differences betweentwo people in the same world, and that means ignoring those extrinsicphysical differences that only ever arise between people in different worlds.
For instance, we ignore the difference there is between two people if oneinhabits a Riemannian and the other a Lobachevskian spacetime. So whatwe have said is not quite what we meant to say, but rather this: therecould be no mental differences without some physical difference of thesort that could arise between people in the same world. The italicisedpart is a gratuitous addition. Perhaps it scarcely matters here. For it doesn'tseem that the sort of very extrinsic physical difference that could neverarise between people in the same world would make much difference tomental life. Nevertheless, insistence on reading the 'could' as a diamondhas distorted the intended meaning.
For a case where the distortion is much more serious, take my secondexample: the supervenience of laws. We wanted to ask whether two worldscould differ in their laws without differing in their distribution of localqualitative character. But if we read the 'could' as a diamond, the thesisin question turns into this: it is not the case that, possibly, two worldsdiffer in their laws without differing in their distribution of local qualitativecharacter. In other words: there is no world wherein two worlds differin their laws without differing in their distribution of local qualitativecharacter. That's trivial - there is no world wherein two worlds doanything. At any one world W, there is only the one single world W.
The sentential modal operator disastrously restricts the quantification overworlds that lies within its scope. Better to leave it off. But we needsomething modal - the thesis is not just that the one actual world, withits one distribution of local qualitative character, has its one system oflaws! 10'°One more example of the same sort of distortion. Let naturalism be the thesisthat whether one's conduct is right supervenes on natural facts, so that one person coulddo right and another do wrong only if there were some difference in natural factsbetween the two - as it might be, a difference in their behaviour or their circumstances.
Consider the theory that, necessarily, right conduct is conduct that conforms to divinely

Modal Realism at Work: Modality17What we want is modality, but not the sentential modal operator. Theoriginal simple statement of supervenience is the right one, in all cases:
there could be no difference of the one sort without difference of theother sort. What got us into trouble was to insist on reading 'could' asa diamond. Just as in the case of modalised comparatives, the real effectof the 'could' seems to be to unrestrict quantifiers which would normallyrange over this-worldly things. Among all the worlds, or among all thethings in all the worlds (or less than all, in case there is some restriction),
there is no difference of the one sort without difference of the other sort.
Whether the things that differ are part of the same world is neither herenor there. Again the moral is that we'd better have other-worldly thingsto quantify over - not just a primitive modal modifier of sentences.
When I say that possible worlds help with the analysis of modality, Ido not mean that they help with the metalogical 'semantical analysis ofmodal logic'. Recent interest in possible worlds began there, to be sure.
But wrongly. For that job, we need no possible worlds. We need setsof entities which, for heuristic guidance, 'may be regarded as' possibleworlds, but which in truth may be anything you please. We are doingmathematics, not metaphysics. Where we need possible worlds, rather,
is in applying the results of these metalogical investigations. Metalogicalresults, by themselves, answer no questions about the logic of modality.
They give us conditional answers only: if modal operators can be correctlyanalysed in so-and-so way, then they obey so-and-so system of modallogic. We must consider whether they may indeed be so analysed; andthen we are doing metaphysics, not mathematics.
Once upon a time, there were a number of formal systems of sententialmodal logic. (Also of quantified modal logic, but I shall not discuss thosefurther.) Their modal operators, box and diamond, were said to mean`necessarily' and 'possibly', but were not interpreted as quantifiers overwilled universal maxims. Suppose it is contingent what, if anything, is divinely willed.
And suppose that facts about what is divinely willed are supernatural, not natural, facts.
You might well expect that this divine-will theory of rightness would contradict naturalism;
for if two people are alike so far as natural facts are concerned, but one of them livesin a world where prayer is divinely willed and the other lives in a world where blasphemyis divinely willed, then what is right for the first is not right for the second. But if weread the 'could' as a diamond, we get an unexpected answer. A difference in what universalmaxims are divinely willed never could be a difference between two people in the sameworld. Within a single world, the only differences relevant to rightness are naturaldifferences, such as the difference between one who prays and one who blasphemes. Soindeed there is no world wherein one person does right and another does wrong withoutany difference in natural facts between the two. So either this divine-will theory of rightnessis naturalistic after all; or else - more likely - something has gone amiss with ourunderstanding of supervenience.

18A Philosophers' Paradiseworlds. These systems differed from one another mostly by including orexcluding various controversial axioms about iterated modality, mostprominently these:
(B) If P, then necessarily possibly P.
(4) If necessarily P, then necessarily necessarily P.
(E) If possibly P, then necessarily possibly P.
It was possible to investigate the deductive interrelations and consequencesof various modal principles. For instance, given the plausible furtheraxiom(T) If P, then possibly P.
and a fairly minimal (but not entirely uncontroversial) basic system K,"
it turns out that (E) can be deduced from (B) and (4) together, andconversely. But what was not possible was to intuit clearly which of theseprinciples were to be accepted, and why; or even to command a clearview of what was at issue.
At this point it was discovered, by several people at about the sametime, that if you interpret the box and diamond as restricted quantifiersover a set of entities 'regarded as possible worlds', then (B), (4), (E), and(T) turn out to correspond to simple conditions on the relation wherebythe box and diamond are restricted.12 We spell this out as follows. A(relational) frame consists of a non-empty set - call it the set of indices -
and a binary relation R on the indices. A valuation for the language of a"K is given by rules of truth-functional implication; the rule that any substitutioninstance of a theorem is a theorem; the rule of interchange of equivalents, which saysthat if '01 iff 02' is a theorem, and —02— comes from —01— by substituting 492 for 01 atone or more places, then `—q51— iff is a theorem; and three axioms:
Possibly P iff not necessarily not P.
Necessarily (P and Q) iff (necessarily P and necessarily Q).
Necessarily (P iff P).
When a new system is made by adding further axioms to K, it is understood that the word`theorem' in the rules of substitution and interchange applies to all theorems of the newsystem.
12The first discussions of this, some much more developed than others, are Hintikka,
`Quantifiers in Deontic Logic'; Kanger, Provability in Logic; Kripke, 'A CompletenessTheorem in Modal Logic'; and Montague, 'Logical Necessity, Physical Necessity, Ethics,
and Quantifiers'. There is also unpublished work of C. A. Meredith, reported in Prior,
Past, Present and Future, page 42. A well known early discussion is Kripke, `SemanticalConsiderations on Modal Logic'.

Modal Realism at Work: Modality19system of modal logic over a frame specifies a truth value for everysentence of the language at every index, and does so in conformity tothe standard rules for the truth-functional connectives together with thefollowing rules for modal operators:
`Necessarily cb' is true at i iff (/) is true at all j such that iRj.
`Possibly O' is true at i iff (I) is true at some j such that iRj.
(Here is where we treat the modal operators as restricted quantifiers.)
A frame validates a sentence iff every valuation over that frame makesthat sentence true at every index; and validates a system of modal logiciff it validates every theorem of that system. Given the followingcorrespondence between our axioms and conditions on frames -
(B) corresponds to being symmetric: if iRj, then jRi(4) corresponds to being transitive: if iRj and jRk, then iRk(E) corresponds to being 'euclidean': if iRj and iRk, then jRk(T) corresponds to being reflexive: iRiit is easy to see that by adding any combination of zero or more axiomsto the basic system K, we get a system that is validated by all frames thatsatisfy the corresponding combination of conditions. Further, every suchsystem is complete in the sense that if any sentence is validated by allframes that validate the system, then that sentence already is a theoremof the system. The same is true for a very much longer list of correspondingaxioms and conditions. The results can be extended to quantified modallogic, and related results are available for systems weaker than K.
These metalogical investigations seemed to cast light on the status ofthe controversial axioms. Maybe we didn't yet know whether the axiomswere to be accepted, but at least we now knew what was at issue. Oldquestions could give way to new. Instead of asking the baffling questionwhether whatever is actual is necessarily possible, we could try asking:
is the relation R symmetric?
But in truth the metalogical results, just by themselves, cast no lightat all. If the modal operators can be correctly interpreted as quantifiersover the indices of some or other frame, restricted by the relation of thatframe, then we have found out where to look for illumination aboutcontroversial axioms. If not, not. To apply the results, you have to incura commitment to some substantive analysis of modality. To be sure, youmight not have to be a genuine modal realist like me. You might preferan analysis on which the modal operators are quantifiers over some sortof abstract ersatz worlds - linguistic descriptions, maybe. (If you meant

20A Philosophers' Paradisethat as a fully general analysis of modality, I would raise several objections;
see section 3.2. If you meant it to apply only in certain limited cases,
for instance to modal talk about how a chess game might have gone, Iwould not object at all.) But if the metalogical results are to be. at allrelevant to modality, some quantificational analysis has to be correct.
If modal operators were quantifiers over towns restricted by the relationof being connected by rail, that would validate some system or other ofmodal logic. - So what, since modal operators are nothing of the sort?
What good is it to know which misinterpretations would validate a system?
I myself, of course, do think that modal operators are quantifiers overpossible worlds; that very often they are restricted; and that the applicablerestriction may be different from the standpoint of different worlds, andso may be given by a relation of 'accessibility'. Therefore I do not justthink that the indices of frames 'may be regarded as' possible worlds.
I think that among all the frames, there are some whose indices are thepossible worlds; and that among such frames there are some whoserelations do give the correct restrictions on modal operators (correct forappropriate contexts). So for me, the metalogical results are applicable,
because I believe that there exist frames which afford correct interpreta-
tions of the modal operators.
Return to an example I mentioned before: it is nomologically necessarythat friction produces heat because at every world nomologically accessiblefrom ours - every world that obeys the laws of ours - friction producesheat. Then, indeed, puzzling questions about the logic of iteratednomological necessity turn into more tractable questions about the relationof nomological accessibility. Is it symmetric? Transitive? Euclidean?
Reflexive? In other words, is it so that whenever world W1 obeys the lawsof Wo, then also Wo obeys the laws of W1? Is it so that whenever W2obeys the laws of W1 which in turn obeys the laws of Wo, then W2 obeysthe laws of Wo? Is it so that whenever W1 and W2 both obey the lawsof Wo, then they obey each other's laws? Is it so that every world obeysits own laws? - A theory of lawhood can be expected to answer thesequestions, and we can see how different theories would answer themdifferently. (For instance, my own views on lawhood answer all but thelast in the negative.) This transformation of questions is helpful indeed.
But the help comes from a substantive theory of what nomologicalnecessity is - not from metalogical investigations that keep silent aboutwhich frames, if any, afford correct interpretations. It is the substantivetheory, not the metalogic, for which we need possible worlds.
1.3 Modal Realism at Work: ClosenessA counterfactual (or 'subjunctive') conditional is an invitation to considerwhat goes on in a selected 'counterfactual situation'; which is to say, at

Modal Realism at Work: Closeness21some other possible world. Partly, the world in question is specifiedexplicitly by the antecedent of the conditional: 'If kangaroos had notails . . . .' Partly, it is specified by a permanent understanding that thereis to be no gratuitous departure from the background of fact: ignore worldswhere the kangaroos float around like balloons, since the kangaroos ofour world are much too heavy for that. Partly, it is specified by temporarycontextual influences that indicate what sorts of departures would beespecially gratuitious; for instance, facts just mentioned may have a specialclaim to be held fixed.
Partly, it is not specified at all: no telling whether the kangaroos havestumps where the tails should be. So it is an idealisation to think thatwe have to do with a single world, rather than an ill-defined class. Underthat idealisation, we can say that a counterfactual conditional 'If it werethat A, then it would be that C' is true iff C is true at the selected A-
world. More generally, the conditional is true at a world W iff C is trueat the A-world selected from the standpoint of W.13Within the approach to counterfactuals just sketched, there is roomfor debate on a number of questions.
(1)How might we best deal with the idealisation just noted? Shouldwe write the analysis of conditionals so that it tolerates ties in the similarityrelation? So that it tolerates incomparabilities? So that it tolerates a(somewhat far-fetched) situation in which there are no A-worlds mostsimilar to W, but only more and more similar ones ad infinitum? Howmuch should be done by complicating the analysis of counterfactuals,
how much by joining a simple analysis of counterfactuals with a generaltreatment for phenomena of semantic indeterminacy?
(2)If one A-world is selected and another A-world is not, from thestandpoint of W, that establishes a sense in which we may say that thefirst is closer to W. What are the formal properties of this 'closeness'ordering? Is it a well-ordering? Does it admit ties? Does it admitincomparabilities?
(3) Is it useful to describe it as a similarity ordering, saying that theselected A-worlds are the A-worlds most similar to W? We could meantoo little or too much by that: too little if we meant only that the orderinghad certain formal properties, too much if we meant that our immediate`intuitions' of similarity could be relied on to follow the ordering. Is therean intermediate meaning that would be more satisfactory? To say thatcounterfactuals work by similarity is the skeleton of a theory. To fleshit out, we must say which are the important respects of comparison. Howfar can we answer that question once and for all? How far must we answerit differently for different sorts of counterfactuals in different sorts ofcontexts?
I3See my Counterfactuals and Stalnaker, 'A Theory of Conditionals'.

22A Philosophers' Paradise(4)How do we connect the 'would' counterfactual with 'might'counterfactuals and probabilistic counterfactuals? Should we have a familyof related connectives? Or should we have a single conditional connective,
and apply modal or probabilistic modifiers either to the consequent orto the entire conditional?
(5)Is the indicative conditional something else altogether? Is it, forinstance, the truth-functional conditional plus conventional orconversational implicatures? Or does it also work by truth of theconsequent at a selected antecedent-world, with the difference betweenindicative and subjunctive being simply a difference in the principles ofselection?
These questions have been much discussed, and I do not want to pursuethem here.14 I do want to point out that they are all within the family.
They do nothing to threaten the core idea that counterfactuals have todo with what goes on at possible worlds given jointly by the antecedent,
factual background, and contextual influences.
A challenge which goes deeper, and which does question the utility ofbringing possible worlds into the story, goes as follows. Here is our world,
which has a certain qualitative character. (In as broad a sense of`qualitative' as may be required - include irreducible causal relations, laws,
chances, and whatnot if you believe in them.) There are all the variousA-worlds, with their various characters. Some of them are closer to ourworld than others. If some (A-and-C)-world is closer to our world thanany (A-and-not-C)-world is, that's what makes the counterfactual trueat our world. Now, whether or not this closeness ought to be calledsimilarity, still somehow it's a matter of the character of the worlds inquestion. It's the character of our world that makes some A-worlds becloser to it than others. So, after all, it's the character of our world thatmakes the counterfactual true - in which case why bring the other worldsinto the story at all?
To which I reply that is indeed the character of our world that makesthe counterfactual true. But it is only by bringing the other worlds intothe story that we can say in any concise way what character it takes tomake what counterfactuals true. The other worlds provide a frame ofreference whereby we can characterise our world. By placing our worldwithin this frame, we can say just as much about its character as is relevantto the truth of a counterfactual: our world is such as to make an (A-and-
C)-world closer to it than any (A-and-not-C)-world is.
If counterfactuals were no good for anything but idle fantasies aboutunfortunate kangaroos, then it might be faint praise to say that possible"As well as the works cited in the previous footnote, see my 'Ordering Semantics andPremise Semantics for Counterfactuals'; my Philosophical Papers, volume II, chapter17; and Stalnaker, Inquiry, chapters 6-8.

Modal Realism at Work: Closeness23worlds can help us with counterfactuals. But, in fact, counterfactuals areby no means peripheral or dispensable to our serious thought. They areas central as causation itself. As I touch these keys, luminous green lettersappear before my eyes, and afterward black printed letters will appearbefore yours; and if I had touched different keys - a counterfactualsupposition - then correspondingly different letters would have appeared.
That is how the letters depend causally upon the keystrokes, and thatis how the keystrokes cause letters to appear.
Suppose that two wholly distinct events occur, C and E; and if C hadnot occurred, E would not have occurred either. I say that if one eventdepends counterfactually on another in this way (and if it's the right sortof counterfactual, governed by the right sort of closeness of worlds) thenE depends causally on C, and C is a cause of E. To be sure, this is onlythe beginning of a counterfactual analysis of causation. Not allcounterfactuals are of the right sort, and it is a good question how todistinguish the ones that are from the ones that aren't. We need an accountof eventhood, and of distinctness of events. And not all effects dependcounterfactually on their causes; for instance, we may have causationby a chain of stepwise dependence, in which E depends on D whichdepends on C, and thereby C causes E, yet E does not depend directlyon C because of some alternate cause waiting in reserve.15 You may ormay not share my optimism about an analysis of causation in termsof counterfactual dependence of events. But even if you give up hopefor an analysis, still you can scarcely deny that counterfactuals andcausation are well and truly entangled.
Causal theories of this, that, and the other have been deservedly popularin recent years. These theories are motivated by imagining cases wherenormal patterns of counterfactual dependence fail. Normally, myperceptual experience depends on what is going on around me, in sucha way as to make its content largely correct. Normally, my movementsdepend on my beliefs and desires, in such a way that they tend to servemy beliefs according to my desires. Normally, the way I am depends onthe way I was just before, in such a way as to keep change gradual. Whatif these normal dependences were absent? If my perceptual experiencewould be the same no matter what was going on around me, I wouldnot be perceiving the world. If the movements of my body would be thesame no matter what I believed and desired, those movements would notbe my actions. If the man who will wake up in my bed tomorrow wouldbe exactly the same regardless of what befell me today, he would be animpostor.
If possible worlds help with counterfactuals, then, they help with manyparts of our thought that we could scarcely imagine being without.
151 discuss these issues in my Philosophical Papers, volume II, part 6.

24A Philosophers' ParadiseCloseness of worlds can also help us to say what it means for a falsetheory of nature to be close to the truth. False is false - and it takes onlya trace of error to make a theory false - but false theories are not all ona par. We may reasonably think that present-day scientific theories, ifnot entirely free of error, are at any rate closer to the truth than previoustheories were. We may hope that future theories will be closer still. Howcan we explain this?
Risto Hilpinen has proposed that we might explain this closeness tothe truth (or `truthlikeness' or 'verisimilitude') in terms of closeness ofpossible worlds. As in the case of counterfactuals, this closeness is a matterof some sort of similarity. A theory is close to the truth to the extentthat our world resembles some world where that theory is exactly true.
A true theory is closest to the truth, because our world is a world wherethe theory is true. As for false theories, the ones that can come true inways that involve little dissimilarity to the world as it really is are therebycloser to the truth than those that cannot.
For instance, we have the simple, approximate gas laws; and then wehave correction terms. But if the correction terms were all zero, thingswouldn't be too different. (You couldn't tell the difference unless eitherthe circumstances were extraordinary or you made a very carefulmeasurement.) The closest of the approximate-gas-law worlds are prettyclose to ours. That is why the approximate gas laws are close to the truth.
Suppose we improve the gas laws by putting in the most important ofthe corrections. Then we get a theory that holds in some worlds that imitateours still better, so the improved theory is still closer to the truth.
Just as in the case of counterfactuals, what we have here is the mereskeleton of an analysis. To put flesh on the bones, we need to saysomething about what an appropriate similarity ordering of worlds mightbe - what sort of respects of comparison are the ones that count. (It seemsunlikely that we could use the same similarity ordering both forverisimilitude and for counterfactuals.) But even a skeleton is well worthhaving. It tells us what sort of flesh to look for - to explain what we meanby verisimilitude, pick out the appropriate respects of comparison ofworlds.
Whether we must settle for a messy business of comparative similaritydepends on whether we can hope for something cleaner. It would be niceto give equal weight to all agreements and disagreements between a theoryand the truth, and never fuss about which ones matter most toverisimilitude. But the problem is harder than it may seem, and thereseems to be little hope that egalitarian methods can ever deliver non-trivialcomparisons of verisimilitude. Suppose we subject two rival theories toa true-false quiz covering all sentences in the appropriate language. Whena theory declines to answer, that is better than a wrong answer and worsethan a right answer. How do we translate the question-by-question

Modal Realism at Work: Closeness25performance of rival theories into an overall comparison? Counting fails:
all false theories alike give equal infinite numbers of right and wronganswers. Dominance fails: it cannot happen that one of two false theoriessometimes does better than the other and never does worse.16 If the quizwere better made, if questions were selected for their importance, ifredundancy were avoided, and if there were less opportunity for errorsto cancel out, then numerical score or dominance on the quiz could meanmore. Of course, a selective quiz - unlike a quiz that includes all possiblequestions - calls for judgement on the part of the examiner. It is opento challenge by those who disagree about what are the most importantthings for a theory to get right. So what? Any standard for preferringone theory to another is open to challenge - if, per impossibile, the methodof dominance had succeeded in ranking some false theories above others,
it could still have been challenged by those who care little about truth.
But there is a more serious difficulty with the selective quiz: our originalproblem returns for every question. When theories give the wrong answerto a question on the quiz, false is false - however, some mistakes are fartheroff the mark than others. Does anything go faster than light?' - 'No' saysthe truth (let us suppose). 'Yes' says the better theory, according to whicha very few very rare particles do. 'Yes' says the worse theory, accordingto which most planes and some birds do. If the quiz were unselective,
the difference between the better and worse theories would show up onsome follow-up question. But if the quiz is selective, as it must be to givea meaningful comparison, maybe sometimes the revealing follow-upquestion will have been left out.
I don't deny that verisimilitude might be explained in terms ofperformance on a suitably selective quiz. However, the choice of whichquestions to include and how to weight them will be just as problematic,
and will raise just the same issues about what it is important to get right,
as the choice of a similarity relation of worlds on Hilpinen's proposal.
In fact, I suggest that the best intuitive guide to what makes a quiz suitableis exactly that we want score on it to be a good measure of how closelyour world resembles any of the worlds that conform to the theory undertest. If so, there is no way to get out of judging which respects ofcomparison are the important ones - not unless, with absurd disdain forwhat we understand outside the philosophy room, we junk the very ideaof closeness to the truth.
16Ex hypothesi both theories are false; so let F be the disjunction of a falsehoodaffirmed by one and a falsehood affirmed by the other; then F is a falsehood affirmedby both. Suppose one theory does better on one question: is it so that A? Then the othertheory does better on another question: is it so that A iff F? Then neither theory dominatesthe other. The conjecture that dominance would give useful comparisons of verisimilitudeis due to Popper, Conjectures and Refutations, page 233; the refutation is due to Millerand Tichy.

26A Philosophers' ParadiseA merit of Hilpinen's proposal is that it distinguishes aspects ofverisimilitude which comparison by means of quizzes tends to run together.
A theory T defines a region in the space of possible worlds: namely, theclass of all T-worlds. The whole truth defines another region: the unit classof our world. There are three relevant ways to compare these regions interms of similarity distance. (1) Size: the smaller the region of T-worlds is,
the more it resembles the point-sized region defined by the truth. (2) Shape:
the more compact the region of T-worlds is, the less it consists of far-
flung and scattered parts, the more it resembles the point-shaped truth.17(3) Separation: the distance, at closest approach, between the region ofT-worlds and our world. It is the separation which most clearly deservesthe name 'closeness to the truth'. But small size and compact shape alsoare merits of theories, and might be considered as aspects of verisimilitudeor `truthlikeness' in a broader sense. All three aspects are involved if weconsider not only separation at closest approach, but also further questionsof separation: how distant at most are the T-worlds from our world?
How distant are they on average (with respect to some sort of measure)?
As can be seen from the spatial analogy, these comparisons have to dowith size and shape as well as separation at closest approach.
Verisimilitude, as such, has been discussed mostly in connection withscientific progress. We can credit the false theories of former times withsome degree of closeness to the truth; and even those sceptics who arequite certain that science will never rid itself of all error may hope atleast to approach the truth ever more closely.
But the verisimilitude of false theories is not limited to theories thatare at some time accepted as true. It applies equally to deliberatefalsifications: the theory of the frictionless plane, the massless test particle,
the ideally rational belief system, and suchlike useful idealisations. Thesetheories never were meant to be any better than truthlike. When wedisregard friction in saying how things slide on a plane, that is fiction,
truthlike but false. When we go on to say that the fiction about thefrictionless plane is close to the truth about what really happens on slickblack ice, that is physics and true. One handy way to tell the truth aboutcomplicated phenomena is to say how they resemble simpler idealisations.
Maybe the same truth could in principle be told directly - it is hard tosee why not - but there is no doubt that we do find it much easier to tellthe truth if we sometimes drag in the truthlike fiction.18'7The variety - that is, dissimilarity - within a region reflects both its size and shape,
just as a spatial region including points separated by at most 14 miles might be a longthin strip with very little area or might be a circular region of about 154 square miles.
Bennett, in 'Killing and Letting Die', and Bigelow, in 'Possible Worlds Foundations forProbability', have discussed methods for disentangling variety due to size from varietydue to shape.

Modal Realism at Work: Content27When we do, we traffic in possible worlds. Idealisations are unactualisedthings to which it is useful to compare actual things. An idealised theoryis a theory known to be false at our world, but true at worlds thoughtto be close to ours. The frictionless planes, the ideal gases, the ideallyrational belief systems - one and all, these are things that exist as partsof other worlds than our own.19 The scientific utility of talking ofidealisations is among the theoretical benefits to be found in the paradiseof possibilia.
1.4 Modal Realism at Work: ContentAn inventory of the varieties of modality may include epistemic anddoxastic necessity and possibility. Like other modalities, these may beexplained as restricted quantification over possible worlds. To do so, wemay use possible worlds to characterise the content of thought. The contentof someone's knowledge of the world is given by his class of epistemicallyaccessible worlds. These are the worlds that might, for all he knows, behis world; world W is one of them iff he knows nothing, either explicitlyor implicitly, to rule out the hypothesis that W is the world where helives. Likewise the content of someone's system of belief about the world(encompassing both belief that qualifies as knowledge and belief that failsto qualify) is given by his class of doxastically accessible worlds. WorldW is one of those iff he believes nothing, either explicitly or implicitly,
to rule out the hypothesis that W is the world where he lives.
Whatever is true at some epistemically or doxastically accessible worldis epistemically or doxastically possible for him. It might be true, for allhe knows or for all he believes. He does not know or believe it to be false.
Whatever is true throughout the epistemically or doxastically accessibleworlds is epistemically or doxastically necessary; which is to say that heknows or believes it, perhaps explicitly or perhaps only implicitly.
Since only truths can be known, the knower's own world always mustbe among his epistemically accessible worlds. Not so for doxasticaccessibility. If he is mistaken about anything, that is enough to preventhis own world from conforming perfectly to his system of belief.20"See Scriven on the recognised inaccuracy — idealisation — of some so-called laws. SeeGlymour on the way we often credit superseded physical theories with being right in alimiting case. This connects our two applications: the verisimilitude of a superseded theoryrests on the verisimilitude of an idealisation.
19Then it won't be much use trying to do without possible worlds and replacing themwith ideally rational belief systems, as Ellis has proposed; for the ideal belief systems them-
selves are other-worldly. / can believe in Ellis's replacement for possible worlds. Can he?
20See Hintikka, Knowledge and Belief, and his subsequent discussions of knowledgeand belief in Models for Modalities and The Intentions of Intentionality.

28A Philosophers' ParadiseNo matter how we might originally characterise the content ofknowledge or belief, it ought to be possible afterward to introduce thedistinction between worlds that do and worlds that do not conform tothat content. That done, we could go on to introduce the epistemic anddoxastic modalities. For instance if we began with a notion of belief assome sort of acceptance of interpreted sentences - perhaps of our language,
perhaps of some public language the believer speaks, or perhaps of thebeliever's hypothetical 'language of thought' - then we could say that adoxastically accessible world is one where all the accepted sentences aretrue. I am quite sceptical about this order of proceeding, for reasons thatneed not be reviewed here.2I A more promising plan, I think, is tocharacterise the content of knowledge or belief from the outset in termsof something rather like the epistemically or doxastically accessible worlds.
(Let me concentrate simply on belief, passing over the added complicationsthat arise when we distinguish someone's knowledge from the rest of hissystem of belief.) The class of doxastically accessible worlds is roughlywhat we want, but it isn't exactly right; some changes must be made.
For one thing, I said that the doxastically accessible worlds give thecontent of one's system of belief about the world; but not all belief isabout the world. Some of it is egocentric belief; or, as I have called itelsewhere, 'irreducibly de se'.22 Imagine someone who is completelyopinionated, down to the last detail, about what sort of world he livesin and what goes on there. He lacks no belief about the world. For him,
only one world is doxastically accessible. (Or, at most, one class ofindiscernible worlds - let me ignore this complication.) And yet there maybe questions on which he has no opinion. For instance he may think helives in a world of one-way eternal recurrence, with a beginning but noend, with a certain course of history repeated exactly in every epoch; andhe may have no idea which epoch he himself lives in. Every epoch ofthe world he takes to be his contains someone who might, for all hebelieves, be himself. He has no idea which one of them he is. If he did,
for instance if he somehow became persuaded that he lived in theseventeenth epoch, he would believe more than he does. But he wouldnot believe more about the world. The added belief would be not aboutthe world, but about his own place therein.
So if we want to capture the entire content of someone's system ofbelief, we must include the egocentric part. We should characterise thecontent not by a class of possible worlds, but by a class of possibleindividuals - call them the believer's doxastic alternatives - who might,
21See Stalnaker, Inquiry, chapters 1 and 2.22See my 'Attitudes De Dicto and De Se' and 'Individuation by Acquaintance and byStipulation'; and see Chisholm, The First Person, for a parallel theory in a somewhatdifferent framework.

Modal Realism at Work: Content29for all he believes, be himself. Individual X is one of them iff nothingthat the believer believes, either explicitly or implicitly, rules out thehypothesis that he himself is X. These individuals are the believer's doxasticpossibilities. But they are not different possible ways for the world tobe; rather, they are different possible ways for an individual to be, andmany of them may coexist within a single world. (For further discussionof individual possibilities, in other words possible individuals, see section4.4). Suppose that all of someone's doxastic alternatives have a certainproperty; then he believes, explicitly or implicitly, that he himself hasthat property.
One property that an inhabitant of a world may have is the propertyof inhabiting a world where a certain proposition holds. (Or, of inhabitinga world that falls in a certain set of worlds. In the next section, I shallsuggest that these come to the same thing.) So if all of someone's doxasticalternatives inhabit worlds where a certain proposition A holds, then hebelieves that he himself inhabits an A-world. In other words, he believesthat A holds at his world, whichever world that may be. We may say,
simply, that he believes the proposition A. So belief about the world comesout as a special case of egocentric belief. And the original treatment ofbelief about the world in terms of doxastically accessible worlds still works,
within its limits. The doxastic alternatives determine the doxasticallyaccessible worlds, though not conversely: a world is accessible iff at leastone of the alternatives inhabits it. If each alternative inhabits an A-world,
then A holds at every accessible world, so it is doxastically necessaryaccording to the original treatment that A holds.
The same person can have different systems of belief at different times.
Suppose it is true, as I think it is, that a person persists through timeby consisting of many different momentary stages located at differenttimes. (This is a controversial view; for some discussion of it, see section4.2.) Then we can say first that the various stages have various systemsof belief; and then that the continuing person has a system of belief ata time by having a stage at that time which has that system of belief.
By treating the subjects of belief as momentary, we can subsume beliefabout what time it is as a special case of egocentric belief. You may lastthreescore years and ten; but the stage that does your believing at a givenmoment is a momentary stage. If that stage has as its doxastic alternativesvarious person-stages all of which are located at about noon on 11 March1985, that is how you at that moment have a belief about what time itis. (On what it means to compare times across worlds, see section 1.6.)
If, on the other hand, that stage has as its alternatives various stages onvarious hours of various days, that is how you, at that moment, areuncertain what time it is. Note that you can lose track of the time nomatter how certain you are about what sort of world you live in, andabout which continuing person in that world you are.

30A Philosophers' Paradise(Knowledge, as well as belief, may be egocentric: besides knowing whatsort of world you live in, you can also know who in the world you areand what time it is. So again we don't get a complete characterisationof knowledge by taking a class of epistemically accessible worlds; rather,
we need a class of possible individuals within worlds as the subject'sepistemic alternatives. What the subject knows in the first place is thathe is some or another one of these possible individuals. So if all of themhave some property in common, then he knows that he has that property;
and if all of them live in worlds where some proposition holds, then heknows that proposition.)
Besides providing for egocentric belief by switching from accessibleworlds to alternative individuals, we must also provide for partial belief.
Being a doxastic alternative is not an all-or-nothing matter, rather it mustadmit of degree. The simplest picture, idealised to be sure, replaces thesharp-edged class of doxastic alternatives by a subjective probabilitydistribution. Thus you may give 90 per cent of your credence to thehypothesis that you are one or another of the possible individuals in thisclass, but reserve the remaining 10 per cent for the hypothesis that youare one of the members of that class instead. We can say that a doxasticalternative simpliciter is a possible indiVidual who gets a non-zero (thoughperhaps infinitesimal) share of probability, but the non-zero shares arenot all equal.
Precise numerical degrees of belief look artificial, so we might favoura coarser-grained system with some small number of distinct grades ofbelief. But whatever small number of grades we took, it is likely that ourscale would seem sometimes too coarse to capture real distinctions andsometimes too fine to be realistic. A better response is to continue to treata belief system as a precise numerical probability distribution, but thento say that normally there is no fully determinate fact of the matter aboutexactly which belief system someone has. There are a range of beliefsystems that fit him equally well, thought it may be that none fits perfectly;
and there is no saying that his real belief system is one rather than anotherwithin this range. Then whatever coarse-graining is appropriate comesout as a spread of exact numerical values within the systems in the range.
There may be more spread and there may be less; we needn't try to settleonce and for all how coarse the grain should be.
We have another reason also to acknowledge that someone may havea multiplicity of belief systems. To a greater or lesser extent, we are alldoublethinkers: we are disposed to think differently depending on whatquestion is put, what choice comes before us, what topics we have beenattending to. Belief is compartmentalised and fragmented.23 Sometimesa doublethinking believer acts in a way that best fits one belief system,
23See Stalnaker, Inquiry, chapter 5; and my 'Logic for. Equivocators'.

Modal Realism at Work: Content31sometimes in a way that best fits another. And it should not be said justthat his belief system changes rapidly; because, throughout, he remainssimultaneously disposed toward both systems. In this way also, bothsystems may fit him equally well even if neither fits perfectly.
In such a case, there are two methods we might follow in saying whatsomeone believes. There is no need to choose between the two once andfor all, but it is useful to distinguish them. We might take an intersection,
and concentrate on what is common to his many belief systems. Or wemight instead take a union, and throw together the different things hebelieves under different systems.
To illustrate, suppose that hypochondria and good cheer are at warwithin you. You are simultaneously disposed toward both. Sometimes oneis manifest, controlling your thought and conduct; sometimes the other.
You have one belief system, the hypochondriac one, under which all yourdoxastic alternatives are in the early, invisible stages of a dread disease.
You have another belief system, the cheery one, under which all youralternatives are healthy. Thus you have entirely different alternatives underthe two systems. (Other cases of doublethink would be less extreme, andinvolve some overlap.) But though the two lots of alternatives differ inrespect of health, they have much in common: for instance, all of themlive in worlds where the disease in question is incurable. Under the methodof intersection, you believe neither that you are diseased nor that youare healthy. Under the method of union, you believe that you are diseased(under one system) and also you believe that you are healthy (under theother). But though you believe that you are diseased and you believe thatyou are healthy, you do not believe that you are both diseased and healthy;
because none of your alternatives under either system, and indeed nopossible individual whatever, is both diseased and healthy.
In your state of doublethink, you have no whole-hearted belief aboutwhether you are healthy; you are half-heartedly certain that you arediseased, half-heartedly certain that you are healthy. The two half-heartedcertainties are not at all the same thing as partial belief. Your conditionis not one of whole-hearted uncertainty about whether you are diseasedor healthy, characterised by one unified belief system under which someof your alternatives are diseased, some are healthy, and your subjectiveprobability is divided more or less evenly between the two subclasses.
If you had the opportunity to bet on whether or not you were diseased,
the difference between the two states would be plain. If you are whole-
heartedly uncertain, you hedge your bets. If you are half-heartedly certaineach way, you plunge one way or the other - but which way you go dependson exactly how the question is put to you, and on how you're feelingat the time. Indeed, in a more complicated case, belief could be both half-
hearted and uncertain: you have one belief system in which your subjectiveprobability is divided evenly between diseased and healthy alternatives,

32A Philosophers' Paradiseanother where it goes mostly or entirely to diseased alternatives, and stillanother where it goes mostly or entirely to healthy alternatives.
If content is given by a class of doxastic alternatives (or by a probabilitydistribution), what is characterised is one whole system of belief, notseveral beliefs - the relevant notion of belief is singular, not plural. Thisbuilt-in holism is one way in which the present approach contrasts withstrategies in which there is a different belief for every different sentenceof the languge of thought that is written in the 'belief box'. There is nosensible question whether something is one of your beliefs in its own right,
or whether it is merely a consequence of some of your other beliefs. Thereis no sensible question whether your belief that you are hirsute is or isn'tthe same belief as your belief that you are hairy; your doxastic alternativesare all hairy, in other words they are all hirsute; and that's that. Whatis written in your 'belief box', if anything, or what word if any you mightuse to express yourself, is beside the point.
Of course, we can introduce a derivative notion whereby one beliefsystem brings with it many different beliefs. We could do so in variousways. For instance we could say that each property common to all thebeliever's doxastic alternatives is one of his beliefs, namely his belief thathe has that property. (As a special case, each proposition common toall his belief worlds is one of his beliefs, namely his belief that he inhabitsa world where that proposition holds.)
A different way would be to say that he has one belief for every ordinarylanguage belief-ascribing sentence (for short: belief sentence) that is true ofhim. That would be quite a different thing; because the connection betweendoxastic alternatives and the truth of belief sentences is far from uniform orstraightforward. There are various ways for a system of belief to make abelief sentence true. I cannot propose any unified formula to cover all cases.
One way involves the doxastically accessible worlds. Each of Fred'sdoxastic alternatives inhabits a world where all things decay; and thatis what makes it true to say that Fred believes that all things decay.
A second way involves not the worlds, but the doxastic alternativesthemselves. Each of Rene's alternatives is immaterial; and that is whatmakes it true to say that Rene believes that he himself is immaterial. Itisn't so, however, that each of Rene's alternatives inhabits a world whereRene is immaterial; for we may suppose that Rene is essentially material -
he has no immaterial counterparts - in which case there are no such worlds.
This means that Rene's alternatives are not among his counterparts.2424At least, not under any ordinary counterpart relation. We could introduce a special`counterpart-by-acquaintance' relation on which Rene's alternatives would be among hiscounterparts; see my 'Individuation by Acquaintance and by Stipulation'. This just movesthe disunification. We get somewhat less variety of ways to make a belief sentence truein return for somewhat more variety of ways to have counterparts.

Modal Realism at Work: Content33A third way involves the ascription of properties to things other thanoneself via relations of acquaintance. Each of Ralph's doxastic alternativesis watching a spy at work, sneaking through the shadows; Ralph himselfis watching Bernard, though he doesn't recognise him; thereby Ralphascribes spyhood to Bernard; and that is how Ralph believes that Bernardis a spy.25 It isn't so, however, that each of Ralph's alternatives inhabitsa world where Bernard is a spy; for we may suppose that none of theother-worldly spies whom Ralph's alternatives watch is a counterpart ofBernard. Bernard gets into the act not through his other-worldlycounterparts, but because he is the one Ralph is actually watching.
A relation of acquaintance needn't be so very direct and perceptual.
Other relations will do, so long as they afford channels for the flow ofinformation. For instance there is the relation which obtains when one hasheard of something by name. Let us say that one is ' Londres' - acquaintedwith something when one has heard of it under the name ' Londres' . Eachof Pierre's doxastic alternatives is `Londres'-acquainted with a pretty city;
Pierre himself in Londres-acquainted with London; thereby Pierre ascribesprettiness to London; and that is how he believes that London is pretty.
(See Kripke, 'A Puzzle About Belief'.) Likewise each of Fred's alternativesis 'arthritis'-acquainted with a disease that he has in his thigh; Fred himselfis 'arthritis'-acquainted with arthritis; and that is how he believes that hehas arthritis in his thigh. (See Burge, 'Individualism and the Mental'.) Itisn't so, however, that each of Fred's alternatives has arthritis in his thigh;
because arthritis is a disease of the joints which no possible individualhas in his thigh. For the same reason, it isn't so that Fred has arthritisin his thigh at his doxastically accessible worlds.
A fourth way involves the acceptance of sentences. Each of Peter'sdoxastic alternatives is in a position to say truly 'Santa brings presents';
what is more, Peter and his alternatives more or less understand whatthis sentence means; and that is how Peter believes that Santa bringspresents. It isn't so that Peter ascribes present-bringing to Santa underany relation of acquaintance, since there is no Santa for him to be related25The so-called belief sentence 'Ralph believes that Bernard is a spy' has a mixedsubject matter. It is not entirely about Ralph's system of belief. It is made true partlyby Ralph's psychological state, and partly by his relationship to his surroundings. It isa matter of psychology that his system of belief has content given by a certain class ofdoxastic alternatives, all of whom watch spies. It is not a matter of psychology that theone he is in fact watching is none other than Bernard.
You might protest that belief is, by definition, that which belief sentences report; andpsychology, by definition, covers such phenomena as belief; so if it turns out thatrelationships of the believer to external things get into the subject matter of belief sentences,
then those relationships are ipso facto psychological! This may seem far-fetched; but afterall it is a mere terminological proposal, and as such is harmless. However, it would compelus to introduce some new name for what hitherto has been called 'psychology', and thereseems to be no good reason why we should have to do so.

34A Philosophers' Paradiseto. Each of Peter's alternatives is `Santa'-acquainted with a present-
bringer, to be sure, but Peter himself is not `Santa'-acquainted withanyone. Nor is it so, anyway not clearly, that each of Peter's alternativesinhabits a world where Santa brings presents. To be sure, each of theminhabits a world where someone with a red suit and a belly like jelly andso forth brings presents - but as any reader of Naming and Necessityshould know, it is one thing to fit the Santa-stereotype, another thingto be Santa.
Four ways, so far, for a system of belief to make a belief sentence true;
they cover a lot of the ground, but perhaps not quite all. Here is onefurther case. Each of Pierre's doxastic alternatives is 'Pere Noel' -
acquainted with a present-bringer, although Pierre himself is not 'PereNoel'-acquainted with anyone. Each of them is in a position to say truly`Pere Noel brings presents'. (Pierre and his alternatives know English,
and are not averse to mixing languages in their speech.) So Pierre believesthat Pere Noel brings presents. So far, it's just like the case of Peter.
But also, Pierre believes that Father Christmas brings presents. Why so?
Not because Pierre's doxastic alternatives are in a position to say truly`Father Christmas brings presents' - we may suppose that they are not.
Pierre has never heard the name 'Father Christmas', nor has it everoccurred to him to translate the name 'Pere Noel' into English. Presumablyit's crucial that the two denotationless names 'Pere Noel' and 'FatherChristmas' emerge from one tradition common to speakers of Englishand French. If there had been two fortuitously similar stories and if Pierrehad been out of touch with the English story, then it would have beenfalse to say that Pierre believes that Father Christmas brings presents.
But how to work that fact into a general analysis of belief sentences? -
Never mind; I have made my point that the connection of belief sentenceswith belief as characterised by doxastic alternatives is complicated andmultifarious.
The use of classes of possibilia to specify content is supposed to bediscredited by the way it imputes logical omniscience. Not so. We haveseen several ways for someone to fall into inconsistency, either by holdingimpossible beliefs or by holding possible beliefs that conflict with oneanother.
(1) There is doublethink, as when our hypochondriac believes that heis healthy and also believes, but in a different compartment, that heis diseased. That is an extreme case. Often the walls of the compartmentswill be weaker and more temporary, due more to momentary inattentionthan to underlying confusion, and yet sufficient to produce lapses fromlogical perfection. Consider an everyday failure to draw a conclusion fromseveral premises that one believes. Stalnaker (Inquiry, chapter 5) has shownhow this can be explained as a case of compartmentalised thinking. Takethe simplest way to believe something: a proposition holds throughout

Modal Realism at Work: Content35your doxastically accessible worlds. Suppose that you believe that P, alsoyou believe that Q, and P and Q jointly imply R in the sense that everyworld that is both a P-world and a Q-world is also an R-world;
nevertheless, we may suppose that you fail to believe R. We may evensuppose that none of your doxastically accessible worlds is an R-world.
How can this be? - The answer is that you may be thinking double, withP and Q in different compartments. You believe that P by believing itin one system; that one gives you doxastically accessible worlds whereP holds but Q and R do not. You believe that Q by believing it in theother system; that one gives you doxastically accessible worlds where Qholds but P and R do not. Thus you believe P and you believe Q, thoughin both cases half-heartedly; but you whole-heartedly disbelieve theconjunction of P and Q, and you whole-heartedly disbelieve R. You failto believe the consequence of your two premises taken together so longas you fail to take them together.
(2)When Rene, an essentially material thinking thing, believes that hehimself is immaterial, he self-ascribes a property contrary to his essence,
and thereby believes the impossible. Likewise someone might ascribe tosomething else, via some relation of acquaintance, a property contraryto its essence.
(3)Someone might ascribe conflicting properties to the same thing viatwo different relations of acquaintance.26 Pierre is both `Londres'-
acquainted and `London'-acquainted with London: each of his doxasticalternatives is `Londres'-acquainted with a pretty city and `London'-
acquainted with an ugly one; and that is how Pierre has inconsistentbeliefs, believing that London is pretty and also believing that Londonis ugly. Of course none of his alternatives is in any way acquainted withanything that is both pretty and ugly, because there are no such thingsin any world to be acquainted with. It would not, I think, be true to saythat Pierre believes that London is both pretty and ugly. (But if that weretrue, it would just go to show that belief sentences work in even moremiscellaneous ways than I have given them discredit for - it would notbe an objection to what I am saying.) This failure of beliefs to conjoinmay suggest a case of doublethink; but it is not the same thing. I don'tknow whether leading philosophers and logicians like Pierre are less proneto doublethink than the rest of us, but at any rate Pierre is a paragonof mental unity. Far from keeping his `Londres'-thoughts and his`London'-thoughts in separate compartments, he constantly bemoans hisfate: 'Would that I had fetched up in la belle Londres instead of this dumpLondon!' There is nothing in the least contradictory or impossible about26Cresswell and von Stechow show how to account for arithmetical error along the linesof (2) and (3), provided that there is something akin to a relation of acquaintance thatwe can bear to numbers.

36A Philosophers' ParadisePierre's alternatives or the worlds they are part of. Of course, that isbecause the alternatives - unlike Pierre himself, who is not one of them -
are never `Londres'-acquainted and `London'-acquainted with the same city.
(4) Someone could believe that a sentence is true when in fact it is subtlycontradictory. Thus we may suppose that each of Duntz's doxasticalternatives is in a position to say truly 'There is a barber who shavesall and only those who do not shave themselves'; and that is how Duntzbelieves there is such a barber, and thereby believes the impossible. Ofcourse, nobody could be in a position to say it truly and mean by it exactlywhat we (or Duntz) would mean; so none of the doxastic alternatives hasthe meaning exactly right. Note well that this is not the sort of case whereDuntz has no idea what the sentence means, and only thinks that it meanssomething or other true; in that case it would be wrong to describe hisbelief by indirect quotation. No; the indirect quotation is legitimate becausehe has a pretty good idea what the sentence means, even if hisunderstanding is not quite good enough to enable him to notice thecontradiction.27 In summary: if we characterise content by means ofpossibilia we need not ignore the phenomenon of inconsistent belief. Onthe contrary, we are in a position to distinguish several varieties of it.
All the varieties? - That question, no doubt, remains open.
If the content of belief, as given in terms of the subject's doxasticalternatives, is not tied in any uniform and straightforward way to thetruth of ordinary language ascriptions of belief, and also is not tied tothe subject's acceptance of inner sentences, how is it tied down at all?
I would say that it is tied down mainly by belief-desire psychology. Wesuppose that people tend to behave in a way that serves their desiresaccording their beliefs. We should take this principle of instrumentalrationality to be neither descriptive nor normative but constitutive of belief.
It enters into the implicit definition of what it is for someone to havea certain system of belief.
That is a rough approximation, and there is more to be said. The firstthing is that what fits behaviour is not a system of belief alone but rathera combined system of belief and desire. Not only are the possibleindividuals divided into those which are and are not doxastic alternativesfor the subject; also, there are some which he would rather be than others.
In general, both belief and desire will admit of degree. Saying what it27We may ask how it is that Duntz fails to notice the contradiction. He knows enough:
we may suppose that he believes each of several premises, having to do with various aspectsof the syntactic structure of the sentence and the meanings of the words, and from thesepremises taken together it follows that the sentence is contradictory. Then how can hefail to draw the conclusion? - We have addressed this question already. Duntz is no doubta doublethinker, and never puts together all the things he knows. The different ways offalling into inconsistency interact, and Duntz combines our cases (1) and (4). See Stalnaker,
Inquiry, chapters 4 and 5.

Modal Realism at Work: Content37means for behaviour to fit a system of degrees of belief and desire is thebusiness of decision theory. But here it will suffice to look at an absurdlysimplified case, devoid of degrees or gradations: all black or white, noshades of grey. On the side of belief, some possible individuals are doxasticalternatives for the subject and others are not. On the side of desire, someindividuals belong to the class in which the subject would prefer to beand others do not. (It is not assumed that the subject's preferences areselfish; maybe the preferred class consists of those individuals who inhabitpossible worlds where mankind generally flourishes.) Now suppose thatthere is a certain bodily movement, which the subject is able to performat will; and which is maximally specific with respect to his ability, so thathe would not be able at will to perform it in one more specific way ratherthan another. Let it be waving the left hand in a certain wy (for short:
waving). Suppose further that each of the subject's doxastic alternativesis such that, if he were to wave, he would be in the preferred class. Weunderstand this in terms of closeness of worlds and in terms ofcounterparts: each alternative is such that the closest world to his wherehis counterpart waves is one where his counterpart belongs to the preferredclass. (We want the kind of closeness of worlds that's right for causalcounterfactuals. We ignore complications about what happens if thereare several counterparts in one world, or if several among the worlds wherecounterparts wave are tied for closest.) Then waving is a piece of behaviourthat serves the subject's desires according to his beliefs. If he does wave,
then to that extent the system of belief and desire in question is a systemthat fits his behaviour.
Besides the fit of belief and desire to behaviour at a moment, thereis also fit over time. One way to think of this would be as fit betweena succession of systems of belief and a stream of evidence: the changesin belief are as they should be, given the evidence. But it is easier to thinkof it as fit between the momentary system of belief and desire and presentdispositions to follow contingency plans whereby future behaviour dependson what happens meanwhile. That way we can continue to concentrateon the present system of belief and desire of the momentary subject.
Return to our simple case, all black and white, and elaborate it further.
Suppose the rest of us are in a car parked near a restaurant; the subjectis supposed to walk over and wave to us if the restaurant turns out tobe open and not too crowded. What serves the subject's desires accordingto his beliefs is not waving now, and not waving unconditionally later,
but rather following a certain contingency plan to wave or not dependingon what he sees. He is able to follow this contingency plan at will, andit is maximally specific with respect to his ability. Each of the subject'sdoxastic alternatives is such that, if he were to follow the plan, he wouldbe in the preferred class. That is, each of them is such that the closestworld to his where his counterpart follows the plan is one where his

38A Philosophers' Paradisecounterpart belongs to the preferred class. Then if the subject is nowdisposed to follow the plan in whatever way turns out to be right whenhe gets to the restaurant, to that extent the system of belief and desirein question is a system that fits his present behavioural dispositions.
(How does a momentary stage follow a plan that covers a period oftime? - By being the first of a succession of suitably interrelated stageswhich together follow the plan. What makes a momentary stage able,
in this sense, to follow a plan? - The fact that belief changes under theimpact of evidence in such a way that, whatever may be observed,
continuing to follow the plan will be the behaviour that fits the sytemof belief and desire of each subsequent stage. So the epistemic rationalityof belief change has not, after all, been passed by; it is still there withinthe supposition that the subject is able to follow the contingency plan.)
What makes an assignment of a system of belief and desire to a subjectcorrect cannot just be that his behaviour and behavioural dispositions fitit by serving the assigned desires according to the assigned beliefs. Theproblem is that fit is too easy. The same behaviour that fits a decent, reason-
able system of belief and desire also will serve countless very peculiar systems.
Start with a reasonable system, the ope that is in fact correct; twist thesystem of belief so that the subject's alleged class of doxastic alternativesis some gruesome gerrymander; twist the system of desire in a countervailingway; and the subject's behaviour will fit the perverse and incorrectassignment exactly as well as it fits the reasonable and correct one.28 Thusconstitutive principles of fit which impute a measure of instrumentalrationality leave the content of belief radically underdetermined.
However, instrumental rationality, though it is the department ofrationality that has proved most tractable to systematic theory, remainsonly one department among others. We think that some sorts of beliefand desire (or, of dispositions to believe and desire in response to evidence)
would be unreasonable in a strong sense - not just unduly sceptical orrash or inequitable or dogmatic or wicked or one-sided or short-sighted,
but utterly unintelligible and nonsensical. Think of the man who, for nospecial reason, expects unexamined emeralds to be grue. Think ofAnscombe's example (in Intention, section 37) of someone with a basicdesire for a saucer of mud. These beliefs and desires are unreasonable;
though if twisted desire is combined with correspondingly twisted belief,
then it may be that the failing lies entirely outside the purview of thedepartment of instrumental rationality. So I say that other departmentsof rationality also may have a constitutive role. What makes the perverselytwisted assignment of content incorrect, however well it fits the subject'sbehaviour, is exactly that it assigns ineligible, unreasonable content when28! have shown how this can happen in my 'New Work for a Theory of Universals',
pages 374-5, though only for a very simplified case.

Modal Realism at Work: Content39a more eligible assignment would have fit behaviour equally well. Thetheory that implicitly defines the functional role of belief and desire, andso specifies inter alia what it is for a possible individual to be one of thesubject's doxastic alternatives, is the constitutive theory not just ofinstrumental rationality but of rationality generally.29I have objected to the radical indeterminacy, especially the indeterminacybetween reasonable and perverse systems of belief and desire, that wouldresult if we tried to get by with instrumental rationality as the onlyconstitutive constraint. But I do not object at all to milder forms ofindeterminacy. Far from being something forced upon us by therequirements of some theory, it seems independently plausible that theremight be no straightforward and determinate fact of the matter aboutwhat a doublethinker does or doesn't believe. I said before that in casesof doublethink, or less remarkably in cases where the exact degrees ofbelief are indeterminate, someone might have multiple belief systems;
none would fit him perfectly, all would fit him about equally well, andwell enough. Now I have said what sort of fit I had in mind.
There is one further complication; doubtless not the last, but the last thatI wish to consider here. I have been speaking as if the assignment of contentwere an assignment directly to a given subject. But I would rather saythat the content belongs to some state - a brain state, perhaps - that recursin many subjects. It recurs in many subjects in many worlds, the worldsbeing sufficiently similar in the anatomy of their inhabitants and in therelevant laws of nature; and it recurs in many subjects even in the sameworld, for instance if it is a world of eternal recurrence or if it is a worldwhere the inhabitants' brains have a lot of hard-wiring in common. Therecurrent state would tend to dispose anyone who had it to behaviourfitting a certain reasonable assignment of content. Therefore we can saythat the state is a system of belief and desire with that content, and whena subject has that state he thereby has the content that belongs to thestate. The reason why I prefer to attach content to the state, rather thandirectly to the subject, is that it leaves room for exceptional cases in which,
despite the constitutive role of principles of fit, the subject's behavioursomehow fails to fit his system of belief and desire. I said that the statetends to dispose anyone who has it to behave in a certain way; but sucha tendency might be defeated. Compare a state of a pocket calculator:
that state tends, throughout all the calculators built to a certain plan,
to cause '137' to be displayed when the 'recall' key is pressed, and soon; wherefore we call it the state of having the number 137 stored inmemory. But there are a few calculators with defective 'recall' keys; theyget into the very same state, but you press the key and nothing happens.
29See section 2.3; my 'New Work for a Theory of Universals', pages 373-7; andGrandy, 'Reference, Meaning and Belief', on 'principles of humanity'.

40A Philosophers' ParadiseWe can say of them along with the rest, by courtesy, that they have 137stored in memory; and this is defined in terms of what the state tendsto cause; but in the defective calculators the tendency is defeated. Thestate of the memory gets its numerical content in virtue of what it wouldgenerally, but not invariably, tend to cause; and so it might be, also, witha brain state which is assigned content as a system of belief and desire.3°
Possible worlds and individuals are useful not only in connection withthought but also for the analysis of language. Suppose we want asystematic grammar, covering not only syntax but semantics, for a naturallanguage or some reasonable imitation or fragment thereof. Such agrammar is meant to plug into an account of the social practice of usinglanguage. It encapsulates the part of the account that is different fordifferent linguistic communities who are party to different conventionsof language. What jnakes the grammar correct for a given populationis that, when plugged into its socket, what results is a correct descriptionof their linguistic practice - of the way they suit their words to theirattitudes, of the way they suit their attitudes to others' words, and oftheir mutual expectations concerning these matters.
A principal way we use language is in conveying needed information.
You know whereof you speak, and you want me to know something;
so you tell me something true; I rely on you to know whereof you speakand be truthful; and that is how I come to have the knowledge you wantedme to have. But when you tell me the truth, and when I rely on you tobe truthful, your words will not be true simpliciter. They will be true undersome semantic interpretations and false under others. The rightinterpretation, for us, is the one that specifies truth conditions underwhich we are indeed truthful and do indeed rely on one another'struthfulness. So if a grammar is to plug into its socket in an accountof the use of language, it has to specify truth conditions for (many orall) sentences of the language.
These may well depend on the circumstances of utterance. A sentenceis said by some particular speaker, at some particular time, at someparticular world. Further, it is said at a certain place; to a certain audience;
accompanied perhaps by certain gestures of ostension; in the presenceof certain conspicuous things; and in the context of previous discoursewhich influences what is to be presupposed, implicit restrictions ofquantifiers, prevailing resolution of vagueness, and much more. All thesethings may be relevant to whether that sentence can be said truly. Butspeaker, time, and world determine the rest: the place is the place wherethat speaker is at that time, audience consists of those present whom thespeaker intends to address, and so on.
30See my Philosophical Papers, volume I, pages 119-21.

Modal Realism at Work: Content41I might even say that the speaker determines the rest. The appropriateworld is the world that he is part of. As for time, of course it is not tobe denied that we persist through time and speak at different times. Butwe do so by being composed of different temporal stages. The stages alsomay be called speakers; and if it is the momentary speaker we mean, thenthe appropriate time is the time at which the speaker is.
So the speaker, at a definite world and time, is one of those momentarysubjects of attitudes just considered. His knowledge and belief are givenby his epistemic and doxastic alternatives - those possible momentaryindividuals who might, for all he knows or believes, be himself. He canspeak truly by luck if the sentence he says is true for him; but to exhibitthe sort of truthfulness that members of a linguistic community expectfrom one another, the things he says will have to be true not only forhim but also for all his alternatives. When language is used to conveyinformation between truthful and trusting partners, the communicationmay take place all in this world; but nevertheless the truth conditionsmust involve other-worldly individuals. To plug into its socket in anaccount of the use of language, a semantically interpreted grammar hasto specify which speakers at which times at which worlds are in a positionto utter which sentences truly.
Then it must accomplish an infinite specification by finite means. Here isa way that can be done. First list a finite vocabulary of basic expressions -
words, near enough - and assign each of them some sort of syntacticcategory and semantic value. Then list rules for building expressions fromother expressions; and within each rule, specify the syntactic categoryand semantic value of the new expression as a function of the categoriesand values of the old expressions whence it was built. One syntacticcategory will be the sentences. Then specify truth conditions for sentencesin terms of their semantic values.
The semantic values have two jobs. They are there to generate othersemantic values; and they are there to generate truth conditions ofsentences. The second job is what the whole system of semantic valuesis for; the first job is what gives us a whole system of semantic values.
I have said all this in a skeletal fashion, intending to say somethingthat will be neutral between many conceptions of what the system ofvocabulary, rules, categories, and semantic values might look like. Forthe same reason, I have chosen the colourless term 'semantic values'instead of some more familiar term that would convey some more definiteidea of what the values might be and how they might do their job. Theobject is not that we should find entities capable of deserving names fromthe established jargon of semantics, but that we should find entities capableof doing the pair of jobs.313IFor instance, I don't think we should say that an ordinary proper name refers to a

42A Philosophers' ParadiseWe have a choice of strategies. What we want from our system ofsemantic values is a specification of which sentences are true for whichof all the (momentary) speakers scattered through the worlds. We mightput context-dependence outside the semantic values - call this the externalstrategy - by making the entire assignment of semantic values, from thewords on up, be speaker-relative. Since different speakers are part ofdifferent worlds, this initial speaker-relativity brings possibilia into thepicture, no matter what the semantic values themselves might look like.
For a given speaker and sentence, we have first the semantic values forthat speaker of each word of the sentence. In accordance with the rulesof the grammar, these generate the semantic values for that speaker ofexpressions built up from these words. Among those expressions is thesentence itself; and the semantic value of the sentence for the speakersomehow determines whether it is true for him. We want a semantic valuefor a sentence, relative to a speaker, to deliver a truth value. We mighteven hope that it could just be a truth value - call this the extreme externalstrategy.
At the opposite extreme, we could assign semantic values once and forall, and put all the context-dependence inside them - call this the internalstrategy. In that case possibilia may enter into the construction of thesemantic values themselves. Else it will be hard for the fixed semanticvalue of a sentence to determine which of the speakers scattered over theworlds that sentence is true for.
In between, we might of course mix the two methods. We could putsome of the context-dependence inside the semantic values, and some ofit outside in the speaker-relativity of semantic values - call this themoderate external strategy.32To illustrate this difference of strategies, and to illustrate various otherchoices and problems that arise, it will help to look at a miniaturelanguage. We shall have one kind of modification, namely modificationof sentences; but that will do to illustrate phenomena that could take placealso for modification of common nouns, verbs, quantifiers, and modifiersthemselves in a more elaborate language. Our little language will havea categorial grammar with three categories altogether, one basic and twoderived: sentence, modifier, connective. There are basic expressions inbundle of properties. My name, for instance, refers to me - and I am not a bundle ofproperties. Property bundles might nevertheless be serviceable semantic values for propernames, along with other noun phrases. (See my 'General Semantics', section VII; andMontague, Formal Philosophy, chapter 8.) If so, it would be unwise to use 'refer' as ourword for having a semantic value. There is, of course, no reason not to say both that myname has me as its referent and also that it has a certain property bundle as its semantic value.
32An example of a pure internal strategy is my treatment in 'General Semantics'.
Moderate external strategies are to be found in Montague's papers on natural languagein Formal Philosophy, and in Cresswell, Logics and Languages.

Modal Realism at Work: Content43all three categories. What the semantic values for sentences are remainsto be seen; a semantic value for a modifier is a function from semanticvalues for sentences to semantic values for sentences; a semantic valuefor a connective is a function from pairs of semantic values for sentencesto semantic values for sentences. There are two grammatical rules.
Rule for Modifiers. If S is a sentence with semantic value s, and Mis a modifier with semantic value m, then MS is a sentence with semanticvalue m(s).
Rule for Connectives. If S1 and S2 are sentences with semantic valuess1 and s2 respectively, and C is a connective with semantic value c, thenCS1S2 is a sentence with semantic value c(si , s2).
Given this much, all else depends on the basic expressions and theirsemantic values.
First let's try treating the language in an extreme external fashion:
semantic values are assigned relative to a speaker, semantic values forsentences are mere truth values, semantic values for modifiers andconnectives are made to fit and therefore are functions from and to truthvalues. For a little while all goes well. We have two basic sentences. Theyexhibit two kinds of context-dependence, both handled externally.
`Rains' is a basic sentence; its semantic value for any speaker is truthiff, at the world and time and the vicinity of the place where that speakeris, it is raining.
`Cold' is a basic sentence; its semantic value for any speaker is truthiff, at the world and time and the vicinity of the place where that speakeris, the temperature is below a certain level. This level is somewhatflexible, and depends on the previous course of the conversation in whichthe speaker is participating. If someone says something that requiresa shift of the border to make it true for him, thereby the border shifts.
We also have one modifier and one connective, both truth-functional.
`Not' is a basic modifier; its semantic value for any speaker is thefunction that maps either truth value to the other.
`Iff' is a basic connective; its semantic value for any speaker is thefunction that maps a pair of truth values to truth iff both truth valuesin the pair are the same, and to falsity otherwise.
(We could have had a context-dependent modifier or connective; for somespeakers its semantic value would be one truth-function, for othersanother. I omit an example.)

44A Philosophers' ParadiseSo far, so good. But suppose our little language also includes themodifier `possibly'; and suppose that a sentence 'Possibly .13.' is to be truefor a speaker iff cb is true under some shift of world. (Let us postponethe important question of what happens to the speaker, and his time andplace and so forth, when we shift worlds.) That frustrates the extremeexternal strategy. If semantic values for sentences are just truth values,
there is, of course, no way we can derive the semantic value for a givenspeaker of 'Possibly O' from the semantic values for that speaker of`possibly' and of 0. The trouble is that we've discarded information aboutthe truth value of 4 for other worlds than the speaker's own. It woulddo us no good to reconstruct the grammatical rule for modifiers, abandonthe function-and-argument method of generating semantic values formodified sentences, and devise some fancy semantic value for 'possibly' .
Once the needed information is gone, we can't bring it back.
(But if the rule said that the semantic value of 'Possibly (1)' for thisspeaker depends on the semantic value of 4) for other speakers, thencouldn't the semantic values be truth values? - There is a question, stillpostponed, of what happens if the world-shift takes us to a world withno speakers. But even setting that aside, the proposal rests on amisunderstanding. To be a semantic value is to be a big enough packageof information. A semantic value worthy of the name must carry all theinformation that will be needed to generate other semantic values.
Anything that we need to bundle together many of to get a big enoughpackage is ipso facto not an adequate semantic value.)
Since the extreme external treatment fails, we have a choice betweena moderate external and an internal treatment. The moderate externalalternative could go as follows. Let our new semantic values for sentencesbe functions from worlds to truth values; then we get our truth conditionsby saying that a sentence is true for a speaker iff its semantic value, forthat speaker, assigns truth to that speaker's world. The rest gets adjustedto fit. Our new semantic values for modifiers and connectives are functionsto and from the new semantic values for sentences. The rules for modifiersand connectives have the same form as before. As for the basic expressions:
`Rains' is a basic sentence; its semantic value for any speaker is thefunction that assigns truth to all and only those worlds W such that,
for some counterpart X in W of the speaker, it is raining at W at thetime and the vicinity of the place where X is. (`Cold' is similar.)
`Not' is a basic modifier; its semantic value for any speaker is thefunction that maps f to g iff both are functions from worlds to truthvalues and g(W) is truth when and only when f(W) is falsity.
`Iff' is a basic connective; its semantic value for any speaker is thefunction that maps e and f to g iff all three are functions from worlds

Modal Realism at Work: Content45to truth values and g(W) is truth when and only when e(W) and f(W)
are the same.
`Possibly' is a basic modifier; its semantic value for any speaker is thefunction that maps f to g iff both are functions from worlds to truthvalues and either g(W) is truth for all worlds and f(W) is truth for someworld or else g(W) and f(W) both are falsity for all worlds.
Now we have accommodated the modifier 'possibly', thanks to the world-
dependence within the semantic values. But there is still external contextdependence; the semantic value for me of the basic sentence 'Rains' hasto do with rain in the vicinity of my counterparts, the semantic valuefor you of 'Rains' has to do with rain in the vicinity of yo counterparts.
I still haven't put in a context-dependent modifier or connective, buta true-to-life example could be now given: 'possibly' with accessibilityrestrictions, where the appropriate restrictions are somewhat flexible anddepend, for a given speaker, on the previous course of the conversationin which the speaker is participating. Similarly, inconstancy in thecounterpart relation (see section 4.5) could create another dimension ofcontext-dependence, besides the sort already noted, in the semantic valueof 'Rains'.
The present semantic values for sentences might look little differentfrom the truth conditions that the whole system of semantic values isbuilt to deliver. However, suppose our language turns out to containanother basic sentence.
`Am' is a basic sentence; its semantic value for any speaker is thefunction that assigns truth to all and only those worlds that containcounterparts of that speaker.
`Am' has quite a simple truth condition: it is true for any speaker whatever.
(Assuming, as I do, that anything is one of its own counterparts.) Butits semantic values, for various speakers, are not so simple. In general,
they will assign truth to the world where the speaker in question is andto some but not all other worlds. That's how 'Possibly not am' can comeout true for a speaker, as, of course, it should. Call 'Am' a case of the`contingent a priori' if you like - though it seems doubtful that there isany one thing to which both adjectives apply.
Given a speaker, his world is given; but when we shift worlds inconnection with 'possibly', we don't necessarily shift speakers. Whathappens to the speaker when we shift worlds (our postponed question)
may be that he completely disappears. We may shift to a world wherethere is no counterpart of a given speaker; that is how 'Possibly not am'comes out true. We might even shift to a world where there are no speakers

46A Philosophers' Paradiseat all. Worlds started out fixed to speakers, but now they are varyingindependently.
So far, our moderate external strategy is working nicely; but now supposeit turns out that our little language contains some modifiers we haven't yettaken into account. Suppose there is 'past', and a sentence 'Past 4' is tobe true for a (momentary) speaker iff 4) is true, not with respect to the timewhen the speaker is, but with respect to some earlier time. Now we have tostart over once more, taking semantic values for sentences as functionsfrom world-time pairs (such that the time exists at the world) to truthvalues, and adjusting the rest to fit. Then we can say, for instance:
`Past' is a basic modifier; its semantic value for any speaker is thefunction that maps f to g iff both are functions from world-time pairsto truth values and g(W,t) is truth when and only when f(W,t') is truthfor some time t' that exists at world W and is earlier than t.
`Rains' is a basic sentence; its semantic value for a given speaker isthe function f from world-time pairs to truth values that assigns truthto all and only those pairs of a world W and time t such that, for somecounterpart X in W of the speaker, it is raining at W at t in the vicinityof the place where X is.
As with worlds and 'possibly', so with times and 'past'. Given a speaker,
his time is given; but when we shift times in connection with 'past', wenever shift speakers. (For a speaker is momentary, and if present at onetime he will never be found at an earlier time.) So when we speak of rainat t in the vicinity of the place where X is, that will not be his place att - he has none - but his place when he exists.
And next suppose there is `sorta', and a sentence `Sorta 4' is to betrue for a speaker iff 4) is true for him under an adjustment of context-
dependent flexible borders - such as the border for what counts as cold -
that makes it easier for 4) to be true. So `Sorta cold' is true when it isn'tquite cold enough to make 'Cold' true; `Sorta not cold' is true when itisn't quite warm enough to make 'Not cold' true; `Sorta sorta cold' istrue when it isn't quite cold enough to make `Sorta cold' true; and soon. We could make yet another new start, taking semantic values forsentences now as functions from world-time-border triples to truth values,
and adjusting the rest yet again.
Is there no end to this? Maybe, maybe not. I'm making up the storyof this little language as I go along, so let me make an end to it. Hereis a conceivable phenomenon that turns out not to happen. There isn'ta modifier `reversedly' such that a sentence `Reversedly 4' is true for aspeaker iff 4) is true for some hearer he is addressing. If there had been,
we would have had to go back and take semantic values for sentencesas functions from world-time-border-speaker quadruples; since it doesn't

Modal Realism at Work: Content47happen (just as no such thing happens in English) perhaps we needn't.
We can leave the speaker-relativity external to the semantic values.
By now the moderate external strategy has come to look cumbersome,
and so we might wish we'd tried the internal alternative instead. Thesimplest method would be to say that a semantic value for a sentence,
assigned once and for all, is a function from speakers to truth values.
Again the semantic values for modifiers can be made to suit, and therule for modifiers can prescribe a function-and-argument method ofgenerating the semantic value of a modified sentence; and likewise forconnectives. We read the truth conditions of a sentence directly off thesemantic value.
Life cannot be that easy. Consider two sentences: 'Am' and `Iff rainsrains'. Both have the same truth condition: true for any speaker whatever.
But they can't both have the same semantic value; because when we applytwo more modifiers we get sentences 'Possibly not am' and 'Possibly notiff rains rains' which cannot have the same semantic value because theydo not have the same truth conditions. The second is false for any speakerwhatever; not so for the first.
So a better internal strategy would be to say that a semantic value fora sentence, assigned once and for all, is a function from speaker-worldpairs to truth values. Adjust the rest to fit. A sentence is true for a speakeriff its semantic value assigns truth to the pair of that speaker and hisown world. Now we can handle our problem about the two sentences,
as follows.
`Rains' is a basic sentence; its semantic value is the function that assignstruth to all and only those pairs of a speaker Y and world W such that,
for some counterpart X in W of Y, it is raining at W at the time andthe vicinity of the place where X is.
`Am' is a basic sentence; its semantic value is the function that assignstruth to all and only those pairs of a speaker Y and world W such thatW contains a counterpart of Y.
`Not' is a basic modifier; its semantic value is the function that mapsf to g iff both are functions from speaker-world pairs to truth valuesand g(Y,W) is truth when and only when f(Y,W) is falsity.
`Iff' is a basic connective; its semantic value is the function that mapse and f to g iff all three are functions from speaker-world pairs to truthvalues and g(Y,W) is truth when and only when e(Y,W) and f(Y,W)
are the same.
`Possibly' is a basic modifier; its semantic value is the function thatmaps f to g iff both are functions from speaker-world pairs to truthvalues and, for any Y, either g(Y,W) is truth for all worlds and f(Y,W)

48A Philosophers' Paradiseis truth for some world or else g(Y,W) and f(Y,W) both are falsity forall worlds.
Now we can check that, because the embedded sentences 'Am' and `Iffrains rains' have different semantic values despite their sameness of truthconditions, the sentences 'Possibly not am' and 'Possibly not iff rainsrains' differ not only in semantic values but in truth conditions. As wewould expect, the first is true for any speaker unless he has counterpartsat all the worlds; the second is true for no speaker.
This is very like what we saw before under a moderate external strategyin considering the behaviour of 'possibly' and 'Am' . We needed to letworld vary independently of speaker, despite the fact that a world isoriginally given as the world of a speaker. Taking speaker-world pairsis just another way to get independent variation. The pair delivers worldstwice over, not necessarily the same world both times, because there isthe world of the speaker who is the first term of the pair and there isthe world that is the second term of the pair.33If we go on to consider the modifier 'past' under the internal strategy,
we will find ourselves forced to say that the semantic values for sentences,
assigned once and for all, are functions from speaker-world-time triplesto truth values. And if we next consider `sorta', we will have to say insteadthat they are functions from speaker-world-time-border quadruples. Thisbegins to seem cumbersome. It's good luck that `reversedly' is absentfrom the language, so that we may be spared functions from speaker-
world-time-border-speaker quintuples. - Plainly, we are covering the sameground twice. There is no great divide between the moderate external andthe internal strategies. There is a trivial translation between a speaker-
relative assignment of semantic values that are functions from world-
time-border triples and an assignment, once and for all, of semantic valuesthat are functions from speaker-world-time-border quadruples. If pursuedsatisfactorily, the two strategies come to the same thing.34It is clear from our little language that sameness of truth conditions - inthe sense I gave to that phrase - does not imply sameness of meaning.
Else 'Am' would mean the same as `Iff rains rains', which surely it doesn't.
It is less clear whether we should say that sameness of semantic valuesimplies sameness of meaning. The semantic values are the same for 'Rains'and 'Not not rains'; or for `Iff rains rains' and `Iff am am'. Do thesesentences mean the same or not?
33Either way, we have a form of 'double indexing'. See van Fraassen, 'The OnlyNecessity is Verbal Necessity', for discussion of the uses and origins of this device.
34For further discussion of this point, see my 'Index, Context, and Content'.

Modal Realism at Work: Content49I think this is not a real question. Is there really anything in ourtheoretical or everyday use of the term 'mean' to suggest that we havesettled the matter - settled it unequivocally, settled it the same way eachtime someone undertook to settle it? No, it is just a question of whatto mean by `mean'. Given a superfluity of more or less interchangeablesemantic jargon, none of it very precisely pinned down, perhaps it mightbe convenient to reserve 'meaning' for the fine-grained notion ofsomething that differs when - as in the examples just noted - we generatethe same semantic value by different routes.
If this is what we want 'meanings' to be, we can let them encode theway a semantic value is generated. In view of the artificial simplicity ofour illustrative language, it is an easy matter to let the generation ofmeanings go piggyback on the generation of semantic values, as follows.
(For simplicity let's follow the internal strategy; if we preferred the externalstrategy, we could let meanings be speaker-relative along with the semanticvalues.) (1) The meaning of any basic expression is its semantic value.
(2) If S is a sentence and M is a modifier, then the meaning of the sentenceMS is the sequence of the meaning of M and the meaning of S. (3) IfSi and S2 are sentences and C is a connective, then the meaning of thesentence CS1S2 is the sequence of the meaning of C, the meaning of S1,
and the meaning of S2. So a meaning amounts to a parsed expressionwith semantic values of words put in where the words themselves shouldbe. Meanings determine semantic values; but not conversely, as witnessthe different meanings of 'Rains' and 'Not not rains' or the differentmeanings of `Iff rains rains' and `Iff am am' .35Because meanings carry more information that semantic values (anyway,
the semantic values so far considered) we can use them to make distinctionswhich would not show up in semantic values. Consider differences oftriviality. Suppose that for every speaker, there is some world where helacks a counterpart; that is a non-contingent matter, but it is far fromtrivial. It depends on just what the other worlds are like, on what sortof thing exactly can qualify as a 'speaker', and on the counterpart relation.
If so, the semantic value of 'Possibly not am' is a constant function thatalways takes the value truth. So the sentence is a necessary truth, butit is not trivially so. The semantic value of `Iff rains rains' is exactly thesame; this sentence too is a necessary truth, but this time trivially so. Thisdifference in triviality is captured by a difference of meanings; but notby a difference of semantic values, for there is no difference of semanticvalues.
35For further discussion of meanings, see my 'General Semantics'; for background, seeCarnap on 'intensional isomorphism', Meaning and Necessity, section 14; and C. I. Lewison 'analytic meaning' in 'The Modes of Meaning'.

50A Philosophers' Paradise(This raises a difficult problem.36 Suppose it turns out that we havethe modifier 'trivially' within our little language, and it works as we mightexpect. Then 'Trivially possibly not am' should be false for every speaker,
but 'Trivially iff rains rains' should be true. This suggests that what wehave been calling the 'semantic values' are not really quite big enoughpackages of information to do their jobs and deserve their names; andwhat we have been calling the 'meanings' are the things that really cando the job of the semantic values and deserve to be so called. Maybesomething of the sort could and should be permitted, but it is not at alleasy. The trouble comes when we ask what is the semantic value of`trivially' itself? Our previous practice would lead us to think that it isa function which takes as argument the semantic value - hitherto called`meaning' - of a sentence 0, and yields as value something whence wecan retrieve the truth condition of 'Trivially 0'. Now let 0 be the sentence`Trivially iff rains rains'; and we have an argument of a functionoutranking the function itself in the set-theoretic hierarchy, which isimpossible. What to do? Resort to queer set theory? Claim that it wasillicit to stipulate that our little language contains the sentence 'Triviallytrivially iff rains rains'? Allow the sentence, but insist that it can haveno truth condition? Require the first 'trivially' and the second in thesentence to be homonymous words with different semantic values? Nosolution seems very nice.)
1.5 Modal Realism at Work: PropertiesWe have frequent need, in one connection or other, to quantify overproperties. If we believe in possible worlds and individuals, and if webelieve in set-theoretic constructions out of things we believe in, then wehave entities suited to play the role of properties.
The simplest plan is to take a property just as the set of all its instances -
all of them, this- and other-worldly alike. Thus the property of beinga donkey comes out as the set of all donkeys, the donkeys of other worldsalong with the donkeys of ours.3736For discussion of it see Cresswell, `Flyperintensional Logic', and Bigelow, 'Believingin Semantics'.
37I say 'set' not 'class'. The reason is that I do not want to restrict myself to propertiesof individuals alone; properties themselves have properties. Properties must therefore besets so that they may be members of other sets.
When I use the term 'set' and 'class' in this book, the reader would not go farwrong to suppose that I am following the standard usage: 'class' is the more generalterm, and covers not only sets but also 'proper' classes'. Those are supposed to be set-
like things which, by reason of the boundless rank of their members, are somehowdisqualified from membership in any class or set. But in fact I use the terms tomark a somewhat different distinction, as follows. It is sometimes suggested that

Modal Realism at Work: Properties51The usual objection to taking properties as sets is that differentproperties may happen to be coextensive. All and only the creatures withhearts are creatures with kidneys; all and only the talking donkeys areflying pigs, since there are none of either. But the property of havinga heart is different from the property of having a kidney, since there couldhave been an animal with a heart but no kidneys. Likewise the propertyof being a talking donkey is different from the property of being a flyingpig. If we take properties as sets, so it is said, there is no distinguishingdifferent but accidentally coextensive properties.
But according to modal realism, these 'accidentally coextensive'properties are not coextensive at all. They only appear so when we ignoretheir other-worldly instances. If we consider all the instances, then it nevercan happen that two properties are coextensive but might not have been.
It is contingent whether two properties have the same this-worldlyinstances. But it is not contingent whether they have the same instancessimpliciter.
It is a mistake to say that if a property were a set, then it would haveits instances - its members - essentially, and therefore it never could becontingent whether something has or lacks it. Consider the property ofbeing a talking donkey, which I say is the set of all talking donkeysthroughout the worlds. The full membership of this set does not varyfrom world to world. What does vary from world to world is the subsetwe get by restricting ourselves to the world in question. That is how thenumber of instances is contingent; for instance, it is contingently truethat the property has no instances. Further, it is a contingent matterwhether any particular individual has the property. Take Brownie, anthere is an irreducibly plural way of referring to things, or quantifying over them. I say`There are some critics such that they admire only one another' or 'There are all the non-
self-members, and they do not comprise any sort of set or class', and I am not quantifyingin the ordinary way over any set or class of critics or of non-self-members; rather I amquantifying over nothing but critics or non-self-members themselves, however I amquantifying over them in an irreducibly plural way. See Black; Stenius; Armstrong,
Universals and Scientific Realism, volume I, pages 32-4; and especially Boolos. I findit very plausible that there is indeed such a thing as ontologically innocent pluralquantification, and that it can indeed replace quantification over sets — sometimes. It wouldbe delightful (except when I want to cite belief in sets as a precedent for my modal realism)
if plural quantification could be iterated up the hierarchy, so that some fancy kind ofplurally plural quantification over individuals could replace all quantification over setsor classes. But I think this project has very little hope of success. So I consider some apparentquantification over sets or classes of whatnots to carry genuine ontological commitmentnot only to the whatnots, but also to sets or classes of them; and then I use the word`set'. But sometimes I think my quantification could be read as, or replaced by, innocentplural quantification that carries no commitment except to the whatnots themselves; andthen I use the word 'class'.
An exception: since the phrase 'equivalence class' is standard, I use it whether or notI take there to be genuine ontological commitment.

52A Philosophers' Paradiseother-worldly talking donkey. Brownie himself is, once and for all, amember of the set; hence, once and for all, an instance of the property.
But it is contingent whether Brownie talks; Brownie has counterparts whodo and counterparts who don't. In just the same way, it is contingentwhether Brownie belongs to the set: Brownie has counterparts who doand counterparts who don't. That is how it is contingent whether Browniehas the property.
As it is for properties, so it is for relations. An instance of a dyadicrelation is an ordered pair of related things; then we may take the relationagain to be the set of its instances - all of them, this- and other-worldlyalike. Again, it is no problem that different relations may happen to becoextensive; for this is only to say that the this-worldly parts of the setsare the same, and there is more to a set than its this-worldly part. Again,
a pair may stand in a relation contingently, if it has counterpart pairsthat do and counterpart pairs that don't.38 In the same way, a triadicrelation can be taken as a set of ordered triples, and so on. Also we caninclude relations of variable degree, since there is no reason why pairsand triples, for instance, cannot both belong to a single set.39Often it is said that things have some of their properties relative tothis or that. Thirst is not a property you have or lack simpliciter; youhave it at some times and lack it at others. The road has different propertiesin different places; here it is surfaced, there it is mud. Nine has the propertyof numbering the planets at our world, but not at a possible world wherea planet takes the place of our asteroid belt. (I mean the solar planetsat present; and I mean to take another world where there are clearcounterparts of the solar system and the present time.) Relative to Ted,
Fred has the property of being a father, but relative to Ed, he has theproperty of being a son. Relative to the number 18, the number 6 hasthe property of being a divisor; but not relative to 17.
A property that is instantiated in this relative way could not be theset of its instances. For when something has it relative to this but not to38Not just any pair of counterparts should count as a counterpart pair; it may be thatpair <X, Y) counts as a counterpart of pair <V, W) partly because the relations betweenX and Y resemble those between V and W. See Hazen, 'Counterpart-Theoretic Semanticsfor Modal Logic'; my Philosophical Papers, volume I, pages 44-5; and the discussionof joint possibilities in section 4.4.39There is a choice between various set-theoretic constructions of ordered pairs, triples,
etc. I shall leave the choice unmade, since making it would serve no useful purpose. (Atone point in section 4.4 I shall take them as sequences, consisting of terms indexed bynumbers, because that makes it easy to leave gaps in them. But even that won't settlethe matter. To make sequences by pairing the terms with their index numbers presupposessome different, prior construction of the term-index pairs, and I shall leave it open whatthat is to be.) So all that I say of pairs, triples, . . ., and relations is systematicallyambiguous. No harm, unless I said something that would have different truth values ondifferent disambiguations; which I have no intention of doing.

Modal Realism at Work: Properties53that, is the thing to be included in the set or not? Therefore we oftensee philosophers go to great lengths to provide for relative instantiationwhen they construct 'properties' in terms of possible worlds andindividuals. A property is taken as a function from worlds to sets of things,
giving for each world the things that have the property relative to thatworld. Or it is a function from world-time pairs to things, thus providingalso for temporary properties like thirst. In the same way we could takethe property of being surfaced as a function that assigns to each placethe set of things surfaced there; or the property of being a son as a functionthat assigns to each person a set of sons; or the property of being a divisoras a function that assigns to each number the set of its divisors.
I find such constructions misguided: what is had by one thing relativeto another might better be called a relation, not a propq-ty.4° It mayindeed turn out that one thing stands in a relation because another thinghas a property, as when the part of the road that is at a certain placehas the property of being surfaced, and that is how the whole road bearsthe 'surfaced at' relation to that place. Likewise it is by having temporalparts which are thirsty that a person is thirsty at various times. Of course,
a disbeliever in temporal parts cannot agree; he thinks thirst is irreduciblyrelational. That is a central feature of his view and, for better or worse,
it ought to be unhidden. That is why I do not approve of the terminologyof 'properties' instantiated relative to this or that - it obfuscates andbelittles the distinction between relations and genuine properties, and soputs us off guard against those theories that try to tell us that there areonly relations where we might have thought there were genuine properties.
(See section 4.2.) And that is why I offer a treatment of properties thatrequires things to have or to lack them simpliciter, together with a separatebut parallel treatment of relations.
Likewise I have made no place for properties that admit of degree,
so that things may have more or less of the same property. Instead, thereare families of plain properties: the various lengths, the various masses.
And there are relations to numbers, such as the mass-in-grams relationthat (a recent temporal part of) Bruce bears to a number close to 4,500.
I identify propositions with certain properties - namely, with those thatare instantiated only by entire possible worlds. Then if properties generallyare the sets of their instances, a proposition is a set of possible worlds.
A proposition is said to hold at a world, or to be true at a world. Theproposition is the same thing as the property of being a world where thatproposition holds; and that is the same thing as the set of worlds40More precisely, what is had by X relative to Y is not a property of X. It is a propertyof the pair (X, Y) - on my account, any relation is a property of the pairs (or triples,
or whatnot) that instantiate it.

54A Philosophers' Paradisewhere that propositions holds. A proposition holds at just those worldsthat are members of it.41Just as it is sometimes said that properties are had relative to this orthat, so it is sometimes said that propositions hold relative to this or that.
No harm in their holding at worlds, of course; but other relative holdingrequires a switch in what we mean by 'propositions'. For instance a tensedproposition, which is said to hold at some times but not others, can betaken as a set of world-time pairs; in other words a relation of worldsand times. If as I think (see section 1.6) no time is identically a commonpart of two different worlds, then this can be simplified: we can say thatthe tensed proposition is simply a property, that is a set, of times.
Likewise an egocentric proposition, which holds for some people butnot others, could be taken as a property, that is a set, of people. Andif we generalise, and countenance also egocentric propositions which holdfor things other than people - such as the proposition that one is a poachedegg - then we should say that the egocentric proposition is a property,
that is a set, of possible individuals. But if we can already call it a`property', what's the sense of also calling the same thing an 'egocentricproposition'?
There might be a good reason. The conception we associate with theword 'proposition' may be something of a jumble of conflicting desiderata.
Part of the idea is that propositions are supposed to be true or falsesimpliciter. Or at any rate, their truth or falsity is not supposed to berelative to anything except the world - unlike a sentence, a propositionis not supposed to be true on one interpretation but false on another,
true on one resolution of vagueness but false on another, true inMelbourne but false in Adelaide, true yesterday but false today, true for41Distinguish my proposal from a different way of unifying propositions, properties,
and relations. The idea is that relations properly speaking are two-place, three-place, andon up; properties are one-place relations; and propositions are zero-place relations. See,
for instance Montague, Formal Philosophy, pages 122-3. This strikes me as misguidedelegance. How can we make sense of it? - Only by giving everything one more place thanmeets the eye. The so-called n-place relations are instantiated not simpliciter but relativeto a world. (Or for Montague, relative to an index that might or might not be a world.)
I say that means they all have an extra, hidden place to them. Thus a proposition is supposedto be a zero-place relation, but it turns out to be a one-place relation - that is, a set ofone-tuples of worlds. A so-called property is supposed to be a one-place relation, but itturns out to be a two-place relation of things to worlds; what is supposed to be a two-
place relation turns out to be three-place; and so on up. The treatment of propositionsis the only satisfactory part. If we identified a one-tuple of a world with the world itself,
as we might but needn't, it is exactly my own treatment; if not, still sets of worlds andsets of their one-tuples would correspond so closely that we needn't care which ones getcalled the propositions. The rest of the unified treatment is not satisfactory because itrelies on the obfuscatory notion of relative instantiation. Therefore the whole idea is bestabandoned.

Modal Realism at Work: Properties55me but false for you. But another part of the idea is that propositionsare supposed to be the objects of thought. They are supposed to be capableof giving the content of what we know, believe, and desire. But it is clearthat some thought is egocentric, irreducibly de se, and then its contentcannot be given by the propositions whose truth is relative to nothingbut worlds; for those propositions do not discriminate between inhabitantsof the same world. If you insist that propositions, rightly so called, mustbe true or false relative to worlds and nothing else, then you had bettersay that the objects of at least some thought turn out not to bepropositions. Whereas if you insist that propositions, rightly so called,
are the things that serve as objects of all thought, then you had betteradmit that some propositions are egocentric. The point is the samewhichever way you say it: the objects of thought in general are not setsof possible worlds; they sometimes must be, and always can be, takeninstead as sets of possible individuals.
Everyone agrees that it won't do to take a property as the sets of its this-
worldly instances, because then two properties will be taken to be identicalif they happen to be coextensive. Some will say that it is just as bad totake a property as the set of all its instances throughout the worlds, becausethen two properties will be taken to be identical if they are necessarilycoextensive. The stock example concerns the properties of triangularityand of trilaterality. Necessarily, a planar figure bounded by line segmentshas the same number of angles as sides. So, throughout the worlds, alland only triangles are trilaterals. Yet don't we want to say that these aretwo different properties?
Sometimes we do, sometimes we don't. I don't see it as a matter fordispute. Here there is a rift in our talk of properties, and we simply havetwo different conceptions. It's not as if we have fixed once and for all,
in some perfectly definite and unequivocal way, on the things we call`the properties', so that now we are ready to enter into debate about suchquestions as, for instance, whether two of them ever are necessarilycoextensive. Rather, we have the word 'property', introduced by way ofa varied repertory of ordinary and philosophical uses. The word hasthereby become associated with a role in our commonsensical thoughtand in a variety of philosophical theories. To deserve the name of`property' is to be suited to play the right theoretical role; or better, tobe one of a class of entities which together are suited to play the rightrole collectively. But it is wrong to speak of the role associated with theword 'property', as if it were fully and uncontroversially settled. Theconception is in considerable disarray. It comes in many versions, differingin a number of ways. The question worth asking is: which entities, if any,
among those we should believe in, can occupy which versions of theproperty role? My answer is, in part, that sets of possibilia are entities

56A Philosophers' Paradisewe should believe in which are just right for one version of the propertyrole.
There's no point in insisting that this one is the only rightful conceptionof the properties. Another version of the property role ties the propertiesmore closely to the meanings of their standard names, and to the meaningsof the predicates whereby they may be ascribed to things. 'Triangular'means having three angles, 'trilateral' means having three sides. Thesemeanings differ. (Or do they? The conception of 'meaning' also is indisarray!) So on this conception of properties, we want to distinguishtriangularity from trilaterality, though we never can distinguish theirinstances. We can put the distinction to use, for instance, in saying thatone of the two properties is trivially coextensive with triangularity, whereasthe other is non-trivially coextensive with triangularity.
This conception demands that properties should be structured. If wewant to match up properties with the meanings of linguistic expressionsthat have syntactic structure, then we want to give the properties themselvessome kind of quasi-syntactic structure. We can construct structuredproperties on the model of the structured 'meanings' considered in theprevious section. We needn't build them from scratch; we can begin withthe unstructured properties and relations we have already, the sets of this-
and other-worldly instances. So these structured properties will requirepossibilia just as much as the unstructured ones did. We will need notonly properties and relations of individuals; also we will make use of ahigher-order unstructured relation that holds between properties andrelations of individuals. It is a relation all the same - a set of pairs - andit is constructed out of possibilia just as much as first-order propertiesand relations of individuals are.
Let A be the relation of being an angle of; let S be the relation of beinga side of. Suppose for simplicity that these can be left as unstructuredrelations; we could go to a deeper level of analysis if we like, but thatwould complicate the construction without showing anything new. LetT be the higher-order unstructured relation which holds between anunstructured property F of individuals and an unstructured relation Gof individuals iff F is the property of being something which exactly threethings bear relation G to. A certain unstructured property is the uniquething which bears T to A, and therefore it is the (unstructured) propertyof triangularity; it also is the unique thing which bears T to S, and thereforeit is the (unstructured) property of trilaterality. Therefore let us take thestructured property of triangularity as the pair <T, A>, and the structuredproperty of trilaterality as the pair <T, S>. Since S and A differ, we havethe desired difference between the two pairs that we took to be our twostructured properties.
Likewise we can construct structured relations. And if at some deeperlevel of analysis, we had structured versions of the relation of being an

Modal Realism at Work: Properties57angle of and the relation of being a side - these might be pairs <A1, A2)
and <S1, S2> respectively, or something still more complicated - then wecould build these instead of the original A and S into our structuredproperties, getting structured triangularity as <T, <A1, A2>> and structuredtrilaterality as <T, <SI, S2>).
Likewise for propositions. If it is central to the role you associate with`proposition' that there should be some sort of quasi-syntactic structure,
so that it makes sense to speak of subject-predicate propositions ornegative or conjunctive or quantified propositions, then sets of worldswill not do. But more complicated set-theoretic constructions out ofpossibilia can serve instead. In some cases, these might closely resemblethe 'meanings' for sentences of our little language in the previous section.
For instance we could associate the modifier 'not' with the unstructuredrelation N that holds between any unstructured proposition and itsnegation, that being the set of all worlds where the original propositiondoes not hold. Then a negative structured proposition could take the form<N, P), where P is a (structured or unstructured) proposition. Takingpropositions as sets of worlds, it is nonsense to distinguish a propositionP from its double negation; the double negation of a proposition is theoriginal proposition all over again. But the structured propositions P and<N, <N, P>) do indeed differ; although they are equivalent, having thesame truth value at every world.
Another kind of structured proposition corresponds to meanings wewould have had if our illustrative language had been equipped forpredication and if it had used individuals and properties as the semanticvalues, respectively, for individual constants and monadic predicates.
Corresponding to an atomic predication in which the subject and predicatehave as semantic values an individual A and a property P, we have asmeaning the pair <A, P). This is a structured subject-predicate proposition;
we might also call it a singular proposition or a de re proposition. It istrue iff the individual A has the property P, otherwise false.
(Two elaborations. First, the properties so used might or might notthemselves be structured. Second, we could just as well have a relation andseveral individuals: <R, A, B>, a structured proposition which is true iff Aand B stand in the relation R. It could be the meaning of a dyadic atomicpredication in which R is the semantic value of the predicate, and A and Bthe semantic values of two individual constants that appear as arguments.)
These singular propositions have been much discussed, under a varietyof names, but mostly in connection with inappropriate questions. Shouldwe believe that they exist? - Of course we should. We must, if we believein properties and we believe in individuals and we believe in ordered pairsof things we believe in. You don't even have to believe in the sets ofpossibilia that I call properties, just in entities suited to occupy some orother version of the property role.

58A Philosophers' ParadiseAre they, rightly speaking, propositions? - Certainly they (and theirmore complicated relatives) occupy a version of the proposition role. Theydo not occupy the one and only rightful version, because nothing in ourtangled and variable usage suffices to settle which version that would be.
Are they objects of thought? - This much is true: somehow, by ourthought, we do ascribe properties to individuals. (Not by thought alone,
of course, special cases aside; rather, by thought plus the relations ofsubject to environment.) Whenever you ascribe a property to an individual,
there is the pair of that property and that individual. So youraccomplishments in property ascribing can be characterised in terms ofproperty-individual pairs, in other words in terms of the singularpropositions that are true according to your ascribing. That much oughtto be uncontroversial, and that much is enough to provide a good sensein which we can say that singular propositions are objects of thought.
Are they the objects of thought? That is, are they the entities that servebest for characterising the subject? - Surely that cannot be answered onceand for all. It all depends on what purpose the characterisation is meantto serve.
When it is meant to serve a narrowly psychological purpose, revealinghow the subject's actions serve his desire according to his belief and how hisbelief evolves under the impact of his experience, then the use of singularpropositions to characterise his thought will be rather unsatisfactory. Itwill tend to suppress relevant information about how exactly the subjectdoes his ascribing; it will drag in psychologically irrelevant informationabout which individuals exactly stand at the far end of the variousrelationships that connect him to other parts of his world.
(To illustrate, remember Pierre. Let us present him with an unlimitedbus pass, and take him to an international bus station. First he comesto an English bus with its destination shown in English, and he shunsit. Why? Because he believes it goes to London; that is, because he ascribesthe relation of going to to the pair of the bus and London; that is, becausethe singular proposition <going to, the bus, London> is, in the appropriatesense, an object of his belief. Next he comes to another bus, a Frenchbus with its destination shown in French, and he hops on with glee. Why?
Because he believes it goes to London, that is, because the singularproposition <going to, the other bus, London> is an object of his belief.
Evidently something relevant has been left out. I don't say that we cannottell the whole story if we insist on characterising Pierre's thought by meansof singular propositions. We could, for instance, mention the singularpropositions which pair the two buses with the two properties of goingto an ugly city and going to a pretty city. The characterisation by meansof singular propositions is badly matched to the needs of belief-desirepsychology, but I don't deny that with sufficient effort we can overcomethe mismatch and pull out all the information we need.)

Modal Realism at Work: Properties59But when we are interested less in the subject's psychology, and morein his dealings with the things around him, as happens if we are interestedin him as a partner in cooperative work and as a link in channels forinformation, then it is otherwise. The more he and we ascribe the sameproperties to the same individuals, the better we fare in trying to coordinateour efforts to influence those individuals. We learn from him by tryingto ascribe the same properties to the same things that he does. We teachhim by trying to get him to ascribe the same properties to things thatwe do. What matters is agreement about how things are; and we agreenot when we think alike, but when we ascribe the same properties to thesame things. To characterise him and ourselves in the sense that is relevantto our agreement, singular propositions are just right. When the samesingular propositions are true according to him and according to us, thatis when we ascribe the same properties to the same things.
In short, there is no contest between structured and unstructuredversions of the properties, relations and propositions. Given the combinedresources of set theory and modal realism, we have both versions. (Thatis: we have suitable candidates to fill both versions of the roles associatedwith the terms 'property', 'relation', and `proposition'.) Both versionsrequire possibilia. We needn't worry about which versions better deservethe names, since previous use of the names has not been uniform enoughto settle the matter. I shall reserve the names 'property', 'relation', and`proposition', when used without an adjective, for the unstructuredversions: the sets of instances, or of worlds. Likewise I shall reserve themfor properties and relations of the kind that do not admit of degree andthat are instantiated simpliciter, not relative to anything, and forpropositions of the kind that hold or not relative only to a world. Butall this is terminology, not doctrine.42There is another great rift in our talk of properties. Sometimes we conceiveof properties as abundant, sometimes as sparse. The abundant propertiesmay be as extrinsic, as gruesomely gerrymandered, as miscellaneouslydisjunctive, as you please. They pay no heed to the qualitative joints,
but carve things up every which way. Sharing of them has nothing todo with similarity. Perfect duplicates share countless properties and failto share countless others; things as different as can be imagined do exactlythe same. The abundant properties far outrun the predicates of anylanguage we could possibly possess. There is one of them for any conditionwe could write down, even if we could write at infinite length and evenif we could name all those things that must remain nameless because they42But sometimes, especially when considering alternatives to modal realism in chapter3, I shall use the names 'property', 'relation', and 'proposition' in a vague and neutralway, to apply to whatever the most satisfactory occupants of the appropriate roles might be.

60A Philosophers' Paradisefall outside our acquaintance. In fact, the properties are as abundant asthe sets themselves, because for any set whatever, there is the propertyof belonging to that set. It is these abundant properties, of course, thatI have identified with the sets.
The sparse properties are another story. Sharing of them makes forqualitative similarity, they carve at the joints, they are intrinsic, they arehighly specific, the sets of their instances are ipso facto not entirelymiscellaneous, there are only just enough of them to characterise thingscompletely and without redundancy.
Physics has its short list of 'fundamental physical properties': thecharges and masses of particles, also their so-called 'spins' and 'colours'and 'flavours', and maybe a few more that have yet to be discovered.
In other worlds where physics is different, there will be instancesof different fundamental physical properties, alien to this world. (Seesection 3.2, where these alien properties get in the way of the project ofbuilding ersatz possible worlds out of this-worldly constituents.) Andin unphysicalistic worlds, the distribution of fundamental physicalproperties won't give a complete qualitative characterisation of things,
because some of the 'fundamental' properties of things will not be inany sense physical. What physics has undertaken, whether or not oursis a world where the undertaking will succeed, is an inventory of the sparseproperties of this-worldly things. Else the project makes no sense. It wouldbe quixotic to take inventory of the abundant properties - the list wouldnot be short, nor would we discover it by experimental and theoreticalinvestigation.
I would not recommend that we enter into debate over whether theproperties really are abundant or whether they really are sparse. Weneedn't choose up sides. Rather we should acknowledge that we haveboth conceptions, and an adequate account of what there is ought toaccommodate both.43If we have the abundant properties (as we do, given set theory andpossibilia) then we have one of them for each of the sparse properties.
So we may as well say that the sparse properties are just some - a verysmall minority - of the abundant properties. We need no other entities,
just an inegalitarian distinction among the ones we've already got. Whena property belongs to the small minority, I call it a natural property."
43Here I am in partial agreement with Bealer, who advocates a twofold scheme ofabundant 'concepts' and sparse 'qualities'. However, he brings the abundant-versus-sparsedivision into line with the structured-versus-unstructured division, whereas I take the twodivisions as cutting across each other.
44The name is borrowed from the familiar term 'natural kind'; the contrast is meantto be with unnatural, gerrymandered, gruesome properties. The name has proved to havea drawback: it suggests to some people that it is supposed to be nature that distinguishesthe natural properties from the rest; and therefore that the distinction is a contingent matter,

Modal Realism at Work: Properties61Probably it would be best to say that the distinction between naturalproperties and others admits of degree. Some few properties are perfectlynatural. Others, even though they may be somewhat disjunctive orextrinsic, are at least somewhat natural in a derivative way, to the extentthat they can be reached by not-too-complicated chains of definabilityfrom the perfectly natural properties. The colours, as we now know, areinferior in naturalness to such perfectly natural properties as mass orcharge; grue and bleen are inferior to the colours; yet even grue does notplumb the real depths of gruesomeness. If it did, we would not have beenable to name it.
Relations, like properties, can be conceived as abundant or as sparse:
a relation for any set of pairs (or triples, or . . .) whatever, or else aminimum basis of relations sufficient to characterise the relational aspectsof likeness and difference. Again we may say that some relations arenatural, or that some are more natural than others; and that the naturalrelations are the same sort of thing as other relations, just a distinguishedminority among the sets of pairs, triples, and so on. Also propositionscan be conceived as abundant or sparse, and sets of worlds mayaccordingly be divided into the more and less natural. This is automatic,
given the division of properties plus the identification of propositionswith properties of worlds.
In systematic philosophy we constantly need the distinction betweenthe more and the less natural properties. It is out of the question to bewithout it. I have discussed some of its uses in 'New Work for a Theoryof Universals' and in `Putnam's Paradox'. Here I shall mention only one.
We distinguish intrinsic properties, which things have in virtue of theway they themselves are, from extrinsic properties, which they have invirtue of their relations or lack of relations to other things. How to drawthis distinction? Some approaches fail, some fall into circularity. (Seemy 'Extrinsic Properties'.) But if we start by distinguishing natural fromunnatural properties, then the distinction between intrinsic and extrinsicproperties is not far away. It cannot be said that all intrinsic propertiesare perfectly natural - a property can be unnatural by reason ofdisjunctiveness, as the property of being tripartite-or-liquid-or-cubicalis, and still it is intrinsic if its disjuncts are. But it can plausibly be saidthat all perfectly natural properties are intrinsic. Then we can say thattwo things are duplicates iff (1) they have exactly the same perfectly naturalproperties, and (2) their parts can be put into correspondence in sucha way that corresponding parts have exactly the same perfectly naturalproperties, and stand in the same perfectly natural relations. (Maybe theso that a property might be natural at one world but not at another. I do not mean tosuggest any such thing. A property is natural or unnatural simpliciter, not relative to oneor another world.

62A Philosophers' Paradisesecond clause is redundant. That depends on whether we acknowledgesome structural properties - properties having to do with the way a thingis composed of parts with their own properties and relations - as perfectlynatural.) Then we can go on to say that an intrinsic property is one thatcan never differ between two duplicates.
There is a corresponding distinction among relations. An internalrelation is one that supervenes on the intrinsic natures of its relata: ifX1 and Y1 stand in the relation but X2 and Y2 do not, then there mustbe a difference in intrinsic nature either between the Xs or else betweenthe Ys. If X1 and X2 are duplicates (or identical), and so are Y1 and Y2,
then the pairs <X1, Y1) and <X2, Y2) stand in exactly the same internalrelations. Relations of similarity or difference in intrinsic respects areinternal; for instance, the relations of closeness of worlds that figuredin my accounts of counterfactuals and of verisimilitude. (See section 1.3.)
Some other relations, notably relations of spatiotemporal distance, arenot internal; they do not supervene on the natures of the relata. If X1and X2 are duplicates (or identical), and so are Y1 and Y2, it may yethappen that the pairs <X1, Y1) and <X2, Y2> stand in different relationsof distance. Consider a (classical) hydrogen atom, which consists of anelectron orbiting a proton at a certain distance. If we take a duplicateof the electron and a duplicate of the proton, then they needn't exhibitthe same distance - they may not comprise an atom, they may be indifferent galaxies or different worlds.
However there is a different way in which relations of distance do super-
vene on intrinsic character. If, instead of taking a duplicate of the electronand a duplicate of the proton, we take a duplicate of the whole atom, thenit will exhibit the same electron-proton distance as the original atom.
Although distance fails to supervene on the intrinsic natures of the relatataken separately, it does supervene on the intrinsic nature of the compositeof the relata taken together - in this case, the composite hydrogen atom.
There are other relations for which not even that much is true, forinstance the relation of having the same owner. It involves more thanthe relata taken either separately or together, since it also drags in theowner and however much of the rest of the world it takes for there tobe the institution of ownership. Thus we don't just have the internalrelations versus all the rest; we have a three-way classification. I shallsay that a relation is external iff it does not supervene on the naturesof the relata taken separately, but it does supervene on the nature of thecomposite of the relata taken together. A relation of intrinsic similarityis internal; a relation of distance is external; but the relation of havingthe same owner is neither internal nor external.
I distinguish duplication from indiscernibility. Two things are duplicatesiff they have the same intrinsic qualitative character; and that is a matterof the perfectly natural (hence ex officio intrinsic) properties of those

Modal Realism at Work: Properties63things and their parts, and of the perfectly natural external relations oftheir parts. Two things are indiscernible iff they have the same intrinsicand extrinsic qualitative character. Extrinsic qualitative character, whereinduplicates may differ, consists of extrinsic properties that are, thoughnot perfectly natural, still somewhat natural in virtue of their definabilityfrom perfectly natural properties and relations. Indiscernibles share alltheir somewhat natural properties. They do not, of course, share all theirproperties without exception - not if we admit, for any set, a propertyof belonging to that set, as we automatically do if we identify propertieswith sets.
To illustrate, contrast two kinds of eternal recurrence. Some worldsexhibit one-way eternal recurrence: there is a beginning of time and thenthere is a first epoch, a second epoch just like the first, a third, and soad infinitum. Then corresponding inhabitants of the different epochs areduplicates - they differ in no intrinsic respect - but they are notindiscernible. They differ in their extrinsic qualitative character in thatone inhabits the first epoch, another inhabits the seventeenth, and so on.
Other worlds exhibit two-way eternal recurrence: there is no last epochand no first, the epochs are ordered like the integers rather than the naturalnumbers. Then the corresponding inhabitants of different epochs are notonly duplicates but indiscernibles. But still they don't share all theirproperties, because for any two of them there are sets which contain onewithout the other.
Many philosophers are sceptical about the distinction between naturaland gruesome properties. They think it illegitimate, unless it can somehowbe drawn in terms that do not presuppose it. It is impossible to do that,
I think, because we presuppose it constantly. Shall we say that naturalproperties are the ones that figure in laws of nature? - Not if we are goingto use naturalness of properties when we draw the line between laws ofnature and accidental regularities. Shall we say that they are the onesthat figure in the content of thought? - Not if we are going to say thatavoidance of gratuitous gruesomeness is part of what constitutes thecorrectness of an ascription of content. Shall we say that they are theones whose instances are united by resemblance? - Not if we are goingto say that resemblance is the sharing of natural properties. Unless weare prepared to forgo some of the uses of the distinction between naturaland unnatural properties, we shall have no easy way to define it withoutcircularity. That is no reason to reject the distinction. Rather, that is areason to accept it - as primitive, if need be.
I would willingly accept the distinction as primitive, if that were the onlyway to gain the use of it elsewhere in our analyses. The contribution tounity and economy of theory would be well worth the cost. But I thinkthere are two attractive alternatives: theories which, for some price both

64A Philosophers' Paradisein ontology and in primitives, give us resources to analyse the distinctionwithout forgoing any of its applications. I have two such theories in mind.
One is a sparse theory of immanent universals, more or less as presentedin D. M. Armstrong's Universals and Scientific Realism. The other isa theory of tropes, more or less as in D. C. Williams's 'On the Elementsof Being', but made sparse in a way that imitates Armstrong's theory.45In the contest between these three alternatives - primitive naturalness,
universals, or tropes - I think the honours are roughly even, and I remainundecided.
The two theories go as follows. To each perfectly natural property therecorresponds a universal, or else a set of tropes. Wherever the propertyis instantiated, there the corresponding universal, or one of thecorresponding tropes, is present. Let us assume that unit positive chargeis a perfectly natural property, which is instantiated by momentary stagesof various particles. For short: charge is instantiated by particles. Whereverthere is a charged particle, there the universal of charge, or else one ofthe tropes of charge, is present. It is located there, just as the particleitself is. Indeed, it is part of the particle. It is not a spatiotemporal part:
the universal or trope occupies the whole of the spatiotemporal region,
point-sized or larger, that the particle itself occupies. Besides the universalor trope of charge, other universals or tropes also will be present as furthernon-spatiotemporal parts of the same particle. For instance, there willbe a universal or trope of mass.
The difference between universals and tropes comes when we considertwo instances of the same perfectly natural property - for instance, twoparticles each having unit positive charge. Each one contains a non-
spatiotemporal part corresponding to charge. But if this non-
spatiotemporal part is a universal, then it is the same universal for bothparticles. One and the same universal recurs; it is multiply located; it iswholly present in both particles, a shared common part whereby the twoparticles overlap. Being alike by sharing a universal is 'having somethingin common' in an absolutely literal sense. If the non-spatiotemporal partwhereby a charged particle is charged is a trope, on the other hand, thenthere are different tropes for different charged particles. There is norecurrence, no sharing of a multiply located non-spatiotemporal part.
Instead, we say that the charge-trope of one particle and the charge-tropeof another are duplicate tropes, in a way that a charge-trope and a mass-
trope, say, are not.
45A somewhat similar theory of universals is the principal system of Goodman, TheStructure of Appearance, provided we take it to apply not only to appearance but to thingsgenerally. Other advocates of trope theory - under a variety of names, and with variousdifferences of doctrine - include Stout, Campbell, and Johnston.

Modal Realism at Work: Properties65If there are universals, we can say that the particle is composed partlyof its several universals. But not entirely; because another particle exactlylike it would have the very same universals, and yet the two particles wouldnot be the same. We can say that the particle consists of its universalstogether with something else, something non-recurrent, that gives it itsparticularity. Then we need a primitive notion to say how that somethinggets united with the universals. I shall call this union 'instantiation'. (Itrust there will be no confusion with the 'instantiation' of a property-
taken-as-a-set by its members.) We can either say that the universal isinstantiated by the whole of a particular; or that it is instantiated by thepart that gives the particularity, the residue which is left if we take anordinary particular and subtract its universals.
(It cannot be said, unfortunately, that a universal is instantiated byjust anything that has it as a part. For one thing, the relation of partto whole is transitive; so if a universal of charge is part of a particle whichis part of an atom, then the universal in turn is part of the atom; butit is the particle, not the atom, which instantiates the universal. And soon up; the universal is part of everything, however big, that the particleis part of. Further, suppose there are disunified wholes composed ofmiscellaneous parts, as indeed I believe (see section 4.3). These mightinclude universals which they do not instantiate.)
If there are tropes, we might say that the particle is composed entirelyof its tropes; there is no problem with a second particle exactly like it,
since that second particle is composed not of the same tropes but ofduplicate tropes. Then we need a primitive notion - `instantion' in yetanother sense - to say how the tropes that comprise the particle are united.
It is an advantage of tropes over universals that we need no special thingto confer particularly - that is, non-recurrence - since the tropes areparticular already. The companion drawback is that we need the primitivenotion of duplicate tropes, whereas with universals we just say that itis one and the same universal throughout the charged particles.46A theory of universals might attempt to analyse all similarity in termsof shared universals. (Whether it can succeed depends on what can besaid about similarity between universals themselves; see Armstrong,
Universals and Scientific Realism, chapters 22 and 23.) A theory of tropesmust be less ambitious. It cannot analyse all similarity, because duplicationof tropes is itself a primitive relation of similarity. But duplication oftropes is much better behaved than other relations of similarity that we46A universal recurs; a trope has duplicates. We could also imagine an intermediatething that sometimes recurs and sometimes has duplicates. A trope theorist who also believesin strict identity over time might say that charge recurs along the world-line of one persistingparticle, but is duplicated between one persisting particle and another. Campbell andJohnston favour this sort of theory.

66A Philosophers' Paradisemight contemplate taking as primitive. The similarity of particles is a messybusiness: particles can be alike in one respect and not in another, forinstance when they are alike in mass but opposite in charge. A theorythat starts with similarity-in-some-respect and attempts to recover therespects of comparisons by analysis will run into serious trouble. (SeeArmstrong, chapter 5; and Goodman, The Structure of Appearance,
chapter V.) It's simpler with tropes: two charge tropes are alike or not,
and that's that. If you will not countenance primitive similarity in anyform, then trope theory is not for you. But if you will, then duplicationof tropes is an especially satisfactory form for primitive similarity to take.
A universal unifies the set of all and only those particulars thatinstantiate it. A maximal set of duplicate tropes - that is, a set of tropesthat are duplicates of one another but not of any other trope not includedin the set - likewise unifies the set of all and only those particulars whichinstantiate some trope in the set. If we accept a theory of universals orof tropes, we can define a perfectly natural property (of particulars) asany set that is thus unified.
This may seem roundabout. If indeed we accept a theory of universals,
why not give up the plan of identifying properties with sets of theirinstances, and say that the universal itself is the property? Or if we accepta theory of tropes, why not say that the set of duplicate tropes is theproperty? Surely these things, if they exist, are fine candidates for therole of properties - and no possibilia are needed.
Yes and no. In the first place, we would still need possibilia if we wantedto acknowledge uninstantiated properties alien to this world. Universalsand tropes are present in their instances, and so must have instances ifthey are to be present at all. If uninstantiated properties are universals,
they are other-worldly universals. If they are sets of tropes, they are setsof other-worldly tropes.
In the second place, universals or sets of duplicate tropes would befine for the role of sparse properties, but the sparse properties are notenough. There may be no urgent need to quantify over all of the veryabundant and very gruesome properties that modal realism has on offeras sets of possibilia. But certainly we want to go well beyond the perfectlynatural properties. When we speak of the various properties that a believerascribes to himself and the things around him, or when we say that Fredhasn't many virtues, or when we say that sound taxonomy will takeaccount of the biochemical as well as the anatomical properties oforganisms, then we quantify over properties that are neither flagrantlygruesome nor perfectly natural. We would not wish to repudiate allproperties that are in any way disjunctive or negative or extrinsic.
However, universals or tropes are credible only if they are sparse. It isquite easy to believe that a point particle divides into a few non-
spatiotemporal parts in such a way that one of them gives the particle

Modal Realism at Work: Properties67its charge, another gives it its mass, and so on. But it is just absurd tothink that a thing has (recurring or non-recurring) non-spatiotemporalparts for all its countless abundant properties! And it is little better tothink that a thing has a different non-spatiotemporal part for each oneof its properties that we might ever mention or quantify over. The mostnoteworthy property of this bed is that George Washington slept in it -
surely this is true on some legitimate conception of properties - but it isquite unbelievable that this property corresponds to some special non-
spatiotemporal part of the bed! This is not one of the perfectly naturalproperties that might correspond to a universal or a trope; rather, it isa property that gains a degree of derivative naturalness, because it isdefinable in a not-too-complicated way from the perfectly naturalproperties. The universals or sets of duplicate tropes would not be goodcandidates to serve as the abundant properties, or even the not-too-
abundant-and-not-too-sparse properties. They make a useful adjunct toa broader theory of properties, not a replacement for it.
(A note on terminology. Sometimes 'universal' becomes just anotherrough synonym for 'property'. The two words are used loosely andinterchangeably, equally infected with indecision between rival versionsof the definitive theoretical role. On that usage, any candidates whatever.
for the role of properties, abundant or sparse, could equally deserve thename of universals. But I do not use the two words loosely andinterchangeably. (I regret to say that I once did, in 'An Argument forthe Identity Theory'.) Instead, I reserve the word 'universal' strictly forthe things, if such there be, that are wholly present as non-spatiotemporalparts in each of the things that instantiate some perfectly natural property.)
Just as monadic universals or tropes might serve to single out theperfectly natural properties, so polyadic universals or tropes might serveto single out the perfectly natural relations. Indeed, if we buy intouniversals or tropes just in order to avoid taking naturalness as primitive,
it seems that we had better be able to cover the relations as well as theproperties.47 Suppose we have a dyadic universal or trope corresponding47There just might be another way to define naturalness of relations: by a very shortlist, fixed once and for all. It seems a little strange to discuss naturalness of relations ina general way when we have only one really clear example: the spatiotemporal relations.
Maybe a few more: maybe part—whole and identity. Maybe set membership. Maybe, ifwe're unlucky, an irreducible relation of causal or lawful connection. But it's still a shortlist. If we tried to define the natural properties once and for all by a short list — thereare the mass properties, the charge properties, the quark colours and flavours, . . . — weought to suspect that we had left off not only the this-worldly natural properties we haveyet to discover, but also the nameless alien natural properties that are found only at otherworlds. It seems a bit less clear that we need to leave room for alien natural relations.
What if the few natural relations of this-worldly things are the only ones to be foundat any world? I regard this hypothesis as far-fetched, but not altogether absurd.

68A Philosophers' Paradiseto the relation of being a certain minute distance apart; and suppose aproton and an electron are that distance apart, and together comprisean atom. Then the dyadic universal or trope is present as a non-
spatiotemporal part of the atom. It has the same divided location thatthe atom itself has. But in a different way; unlike the atom, the universalor trope is not itself divided. It doesn't have one part in the proton andanother in the electron. If we accept this theory, we just have to acceptthat an undivided thing can have a divided location. It is part of the atom;
but no part of it is part of the proton or part of the electron. If we acceptthis theory, we must say that the proton and the electron do not exhaustthe atom." All this is disturbingly peculiar, much more so that themonadic case, but if the price is right we could learn to tolerate it.
The atom has the structural property of consisting of a proton andan electron a certain distance apart. Is there a structural universal or astructural trope to correspond to this property? If so, that too is presentas a non-spatiotemporal part of the atom. We might think that ifsparseness is wanted, then this extra thing is superfluous. We already havethe monadic universals or tropes of the two particles, and the dyadicuniversal or trope of distance between them. The presence of these alreadysettles the atom's structure - so what would a structural universal or tropeadd? But just as the atom itself is not some extra thing over and aboveits proton and its electron and their distance, so we might say that theatom's structural universal or trope is no extra thing. It is somehowcomposed of the simpler universals or tropes., and so is nothing over andabove them; so we needn't complain of its redundancy. It is not entirelyclear how the composition of structural universals would work and soI think it doubtful whether a theory of universals ought to admit them."
Structural tropes, on the other hand, seem unproblematic.
The question of primitive naturalness versus universals or tropes is"I said that an external relation, although it does not supervene on the intrinsic naturesof its relata taken separately, does supervene on the intrinsic nature of the composite ofits relata - for instance, the electron-proton distance supervenes on the intrinsic natureof the whole atom. To make this work under a theory of universals or tropes, 'composite'has to be understood in a special way. The relata are just the electron and the proton,
but their composite has to be augmented to include also their distance-universal or distance-
trope, and any other dyadic universals or tropes that may connect the electron and theproton. (See Williams, 'Necessary Facts', pages 603-5.) Might we throw in too much,
and falsely certify the relation of having the same owner as external because we hadthrown in a corresponding universal or trope? No fear! - The alleged universal or tropewould be superfluous, so a sparse theory will deny its existence. Just as we can safelysay that all perfectly natural properties are ex officio intrinsic, so we can say that all perfectlynatural relations are external, and those will be the only relations to which there corresponddyadic universals or tropes.
49See my 'Against Structural Universals'; and Armstrong, Universals and ScientificRealism, volume II, pages 69-70.

Isolation 69peripheral to the defence of modal realism which is the main businessof this book; I have nevertheless taken it up here for several reasons.
First, because of a question I have already considered: whether the benefitsof modal realism are diminished if we believe in universals or tropes andtherefore have less need of properties taken as sets of possibilia. Second,
because of the question how satisfactory it might be to replace my genuinepossible worlds and individuals by ersatz ones constructed out of this-
worldly universals or tropes; I take up this question in section 3.2. Andthird, because universals or tropes turn out to complicate many of ourdiscussions of the tenets of modal realism and the difference betweenvarieties of it. To take one example: I noted above that a universal ispart of anything that a particular that instantiates it is part of. That makesit a common part of all worlds wherein it is instantiated; which meansthat so long as I remain neutral about the existence of universals, I needto qualify my denial of trans-world identity. (See section 4.2.)
1.6 IsolationI hope that by saying what theoretical purposes it is meant to serve, Ihave helped to make clear what my thesis of plurality of worlds is. NowI shall address some further questions of formulation and state somefurther tenets of my position.
A possible world has parts, namely possible individuals. If two thingsare parts of the same world, I call them worldmates.5° A world is themereological sum51 of all the possible individuals that are parts of it, andso are worldmates of one another. It is a maximal sum: anything thatis a worldmate of any part of it is itself a part. (This is just a consequenceof my denial that worlds overlap.) But not just any sum of parts of worldsis itself a world. It might, of course, be only part of a world. Or it mightconsist of parts of two or more different worlds; thus it might be spread50Worldmates are compossible in the strongest sense of the word. Two things arecompossible in another sense if they are vicariously worldmates, in virtue of theircounterparts; that is, iff some one world contains counterparts of both of them. Twothings are compossible in yet another sense iff some one world contains intrinsic duplicatesof both. In this third sense, any two possible individuals are compossible (except, perhaps,
when one is too big to leave room for the other); see section 1.8.51The mereological sum, or fusion, of several things is the least inclusive thing thatincludes all of them as parts. It is composed of them and of nothing more; any part ofit overlaps one or more of them; it is a proper part of anything else that has all of themas parts. Equivalently: the mereological sum of several things is that thing such that, forany X, X overlaps it iff X overlaps one of them. For background on the mereology thatI shall be using extensively in this book, see Leonard and Goodman; or Goodman, Structureof Appearance, section 11.4.

70A Philosophers' Paradiseover logical space, not wholly within any one world, and its parts mightnot all be worldmates of one another.
What, then, is the difference between a sum of possible individualsthat is a possible world, and one that is not? What makes two thingsworldmates? How are the worlds demarcated one from another? Whydon't all the possibilia comprise one big world? Or, at the other extreme,
why isn't each possible neutrino a little world of its own? In Perry'sterminology: what is the unity relation for possible worlds?52I gave part of the answer in my opening section, when I said that nothingis so far away from us in space, or so far in the past or the future, asnot to be part of the same world as ourselves. The point seemsuncontroversial, and it seems open to generalisation: whenever twopossible individuals are spatiotemporally related, they are worldmates.
If there is any distance between them - be it great or small, spatial ortemporal - they are parts of one single world.
(Better: for any two possible individuals, if every particular part ofone is spatiotemporally related to every particular part of the other thatis wholly distinct from it, then the two are worldmates. This formulationavoids difficults that might be raised concerning partial spatiotemporalrelatedness of trans-world mereological sums; difficulties about multiplylocated universals; and difficulties about whether we ought to say thatoverlapping things are spatiotemporally related.)
This is perhaps more controversial than it seems. Didn't I speak, inconnection with predetermination, of worlds that diverge? That is, ofworlds that are exactly alike up to some time; and differ thereafter?
Doesn't that presuppose trans-world comparison of times, simultaneityor succession between events of different worlds? Trans-worldspatiotemporal relations between the participants in those events, or thespacetime regions in which they happen?
I think not. Trans-world comparisons, yes; trans-world spatiotemporalrelations, no.
Suppose two worlds are exactly alike up to a certain time, and divergethereafter. I explain it thus. There is an initial segment of one world,
and there is an initial segment of the other, which are perfect duplicates.
They are maximal such segments: they are not respectively included intwo larger initial segments which are also duplicates. There is acorrespondence between the parts of these two segments under which thecorresponding parts also are duplicates; and under which correspondingparts are related alike spatiotemporally, and as whole to part. Thereforethe corresponding parts are excellent counterparts. They are so whetheryou take a counterpart relation that stresses similarity of intrinsic52The question is raised by Richards. I am grateful to him, and to David Johnson, forhelpful discussion of it.

Isolation71character, or one that stresses extrinsic match of origins, or even one thatstresses historical role. (Except insofar as something that is part of theduplicated region has a historical role lying partly outside that region.)
Temporal cross-sections of the worlds, for instance, are excellentcounterparts: there are counterpart centuries, or weeks, or seconds.
Likewise there are counterpart places: galaxies, planets, towns. So thingsthat are parts of the two worlds may be simultaneous or not, they maybe in the same or different towns, they may be near or far from oneanother, in very natural counterpart-theoretic senses. But these are notgenuine spatiotemporal relations across worlds. The only trans-worldrelations involved are internal relations of similarity; not indeed betweenthe very individuals that are quasi-simultaneous (or whatever) but betweenlarger duplicate parts of the two worlds wherein those individuals aresituated.
Suppose you discovered - say, from a well-accredited oracle - that largeparts of human history were re-enacted, with interesting variations, inremote galaxies at times in the distant past and future. In speaking ofthese re-enactments, you would surely introduce counterpart-theoreticcomparisons of place and time. You might say that a remarkable eventin one of them took place last year in Headington; when you would alsosay, without any conflict, that it will take place about 6.4 x 1012 yearshence, 3.8 x 109 light years away in the general direction of theconstellation Centaurus. You should have no greater difficulty in squaringtalk about other-worldly goings-on last week in Didcot with my denialthat there are any spatiotemporal relations between parts of differentworlds.
So we have a sufficient condition: if two things are spatiotemporallyrelated, then they are worldmates. The converse is much more problematic.
Yet that is more or less the doctrine that I propose. Putting the two halvestogether: things are worldmates iff they are spatiotemporally related. Aworld is unified, then, by the spatiotemporal interrelation of its parts.
There are no spatiotemporal relations across the boundary between oneworld and another; but no matter how we draw a boundary within a world,
there will be spatiotemporal relations across it.
A first, and simplest, objection is that a world might possibly consistof two or more completely disconnected spacetimes. (Maybe our worlddoes, if indeed such disconnection is possible.) But whatever way a worldmight be is a way that some world is; and one world with two disconnectedspacetimes is a counterexample against my proposal. Against thisobjection, I must simply deny the premise. I would rather not; I admitsome inclination to agree with it. But it seems to me that it is no central partof our modal thinking, and not a consequence of any interesting generalprinciple about what is possible. So it is negotiable. Given a choice between

72A Philosophers' Paradiserejecting the alleged possibility of disconnected spacetimes within a singleworld and (what I take to be the alternative) resorting to a primitiveworldmate relation, I take the former to be more credible.
I cannot give you disconnected spacetimes within a single world; butI can give you some passable substitutes. One big world, spatiotemporallyinterrelated, might have many different world-like parts. Ex hypothesithese are not complete worlds, but they could seem to be. They mightbe four-dimensional; they might have no boundaries; there might be littleor no causal interaction between them. Indeed, each of these world-likeparts of one big world might be a duplicate of some genuinely completeworld. There are at least four ways for one big world to contain manyworld-like parts. Each is a way that a world could be; and so, say I, eachis a way that some world is.
(1)The spacetime of the big world might have an extra dimension. Theworld-like parts might then be spread out along this extra dimension,
like a stack of flatlands in three-space.
(2)The world-like parts might share a common spacetime. There mightbe several populations, interpenetrating without interaction in the singlespacetime where all of them live. If so, of course the inhabitants had betternot interact with the shape of their spacetime as we do with the shapeof ours; else this interaction enables the different populations to interactindirectly with one another.
(3)Time might have the metric structure not of the real line, but ratherof many copies of the real line laid end to end. We would have manydifferent epochs, one after another. Yet each epoch would have infiniteduration, no beginning, and no end. Inhabitants of different epochs wouldbe spatiotemporally related, but their separation would be infinite. Orinstead there might be infinitely many infinite regions laid out side byside in space; then there would have to be infinite spatial distances betweenpoints in different world-like regions.
(4)Or time might have the metric structure of the real line, as wenormally suppose. And yet there might be infinitely many world-likeepochs one after the other. Each might be of finite duration; but theirfinitude might be hidden from their inhabitants because, as the end ofan epoch approaches, everything speeds up. Suppose that one generationlives and dies in twelve months, the next in six, the next in three, .. .
so that infinitely many generations fit into the last two years of their epoch.
Similarly, world-like regions of finite diameter might be packed spatially,
with shrinkage as things approach the edge.
If you thought, as I did too, that a single world might consist of manymore or less isolated world-like parts, how sure can you be that you reallyhad in mind the supposed possibility that I reject? Are you sure that itwas an essential part of your thought that the world-like parts were inno way spatiotemporally related? Or might you not have had in mind,

Isolation73rather, one of these substitutes I offer? Or might your thought have beensufficiently lacking in specificity that the substitutes would do it justice?
A second objection concerns spirits, and episodes in the mental livesof spirits, which are traditionally supposed to be outside of space. Howeversure we are that no such deficient things are worldmates of ours, is itnot at least possible that the traditional story might be true? If so, thensome world is populated by such spirits. But that is no objection. I donot say that all worlds are unified by spatiotemporal interrelatedness injust the same way. So the interrelation of a world of spirits might be looserthan that of a decent world like ours. If the spirits and their doings arelocated in time alone, that is good enough. (To make sense of that, maybetime and space would have to be more separable at the world of the spiritsthan they are at our world; but that is surely possible.) I can even allowmarvellous Spirits who are spatiotemporally related to other things bybeing omnipresent - for that is one way among others to stand inspatiotemporal relations. I am not sure why I need to defend the possibilityof spirit tales - after all, people have been known to accept impossibletheories, as witness naive set theory - but in fact I think I give them atleast as much room in logical space as they deserve.
A third objection concerns the possibility that there might be nothing,
and not rather something. If a world is a maximal mereological sum ofspatiotemporally interrelated things, that makes no provision for anabsolutely empty world. A world is not like a bottle that might hold nobeer. The world is the totality of things it contains, so even if there'sno beer, there's still the bottle. And if there isn't even the bottle, there'snothing there at all. And nothing isn't a very minimal something. Minimalworlds there can indeed be. There can be nothing much: just somehomogeneous unoccupied spacetime, or maybe only one single point ofit. But nothing much is still something, and there isn't any world wherethere's nothing at all. That makes it necessary that there is something.
For it's true at all worlds that there is something: it's true whenever werestrict our quantifiers to the domain of parts of a single world, evenif the only part of some world is one indivisible nondescript point. Ofcourse, if we don't restrict quantifiers from the standpoint of one worldor another, then all the more is it true that there is something rather thannothing: there is logical space, the totality of the worlds in all their glory.
How bad is this? I think the worst of it is the fear that I might offerto explain why there is something rather than nothing, just by saying thatthis is a necessary truth. But don't fear; I do not think that would bean explanation. For an explanatfon, I think, is an account of etiology:
it tells us something about how an event was caused. Or it tells ussomething general about how some, or many, or all events of a certainkind are caused. Or it explains an existential fact by telling us somethingabout how several events jointly make that fact true, and then perhaps

74A Philosophers' Paradisesomething about how those truthmaker events were caused. So I thinkthere is nothing I might say that could count as explaining why there issomething rather than nothing; and that includes saying, truly, that thereis no world where there is nothing.53So far I am stonewalling. I accept the unwelcome consequences of mythesis, and claim they are not as bad as you might think. But there isone more objection to consider, and this one really does seem to me tocall for a retreat. The last resort would be a primitive worldmate relation,
but I think it won't be necessary to fall back that far.
Imagine a theory of spacetime that is built for Newtonian mechanics,
or for common sense. (Old-fashioned Newtonian mechanics, as opposedto recent reformulations that are still in a sense Newtonian, but do awaywith absolute rest.) This theory will say that any two spacetime pointsare related by a spatial distance and a temporal distance: two differentdistances. One but not both of these distances may be zero, thus absolutesimultaneity and absolute rest both are well defined. I suppose this isa way the world might have been, therefore it is a way that some worldis. But we have good reason to think that our world is different. In ourrelativistic world, any two spacetime points have only one distance betweenthem; it may be a spatial distance, it may be a temporal distance, or itmay be a zero distance which is neither spatial nor temporal (`space-like'interval coded by a positive real, 'time-like' interval coded by a positiveimaginary, or light-like' interval). Of course there are other differencesbetween Newtonian and relativistic spacetime, but this difference of twodistances versus one is the difference that matters to ontology.
We name the properties and relations that figure in our world; so whatwe call `spatiotemporal relations' are relations that behave in the relativisticway, with spatial or temporal distance but not both. Now when we talkabout the Newtonian world, are we talking about the possibility ofdifferent behaviour on the part of those same relations? Is it that thosevery relations might double up to give us two distances, one of each kind,
between the same two points? Or are we talking instead about somedifferent relations that might take the place of the spatiotemporal relationsof our world?54531 find it pleasing that another view, the one I like second best after my own, alsoseems to make it come out necessary that there is something rather than nothing. Thisis the 'combinatorial' view: in place of other worlds, we have constructions in which theelements of this world - elementary particulars and universals, perhaps - are put togetherin different combinations. (See section 3.2, in which I present this as a form of 'linguisticersatzism'.) But as D. M. Armstrong has noted in discussion, there is no way to combineelements and make nothing at all. So there is no combinatorial possibility that there mightbe nothing.
54What does this question mean? Maybe one thing, maybe another, depending on ourunderlying theory of natural properties and relations; and on that question I am staying

Isolation75If it is the former, no worries. The Newtonian world is just as muchspatiotemporally interrelated as ours is, even if the spatiotemporal relationsbehave differently there. But if it is the latter, then strictly speaking Icannot say that the Newtonian world is spatiotemporally interrelated.
It has its system of external relations, whereby its parts are arranged,
which are analogous to the spatiotemporal relations whereby the partsof our world are arranged. But these Newtonian impostors are not tobe called the `spatiotemporal relations', because that is the name we gaveto the different relations that hold between the parts of our world. (Itis beside the point that when we named the relations of our world, wemay have thought they behaved in the Newtonian rather than therelativistic way. However much we intended to name relations thatconformed to some theory, doubtless we intended much more to namerelations that are pervasive in our world.) Similarly, mutatis mutandis,
if the inhabitants of a Newtonian world talk about the possibility of aworld like ours. Suppose they did pretty much what we did in namingwhat they call `spatiotemporal relations'; and suppose it is not so thatthe very same relations behave in the Newtonian way at one world andin the relativistic way at the other. Then they should not say, strictlyspeaking, that our world is `spatiotemporally interrelated'.
I do not know how to answer the question whether we have the samerelations in the different worlds. It might even have different answersin different cases: some pairs of a Newtonian and a relativistic world usethe same relations (doubled up for the Newtonian world), other pairsdon't. Also, I suppose some worlds are interrelated by systems of externalrelations that differ more, at least in their behaviour, than Newtoniandoubled-up distances differ from relativistic distances. It would be niceto suppose that all worlds are interrelated by the very same relations,
namely the ones that we call `spatiotemporar , despite whateverbehavioural differences there may be. I do not reject this supposition.
But I am unwilling to rely on it.
What I need to say is that each world is interrelated (and is maximalwith respect to such interrelation) by a system of relations which, if theyare not the spatiotemporal relations rightly so called, are at any rateanalogous to them. Then my task is to spell out the analogy. At leastsome of the points of analogy should go as follows. (1) The relations areneutral between three alternatives. (See section 1.5.) (1) Maybe naturalness is a primitive,
applied to properties or relations understood as sets. Then we have families of relationsthat can serve as the common spatiotemporal relations of all the worlds, and we haveother families of less inclusive relations that can serve as the different special spatiotemporalrelations for different kinds of worlds, and the question is which relations are more natural.
(2) Maybe a relation is natural when its instances share a relational universal; then thequestion is what universals there are. (3) Maybe a relation is natural when its instancescontain duplicate tropes; then the question is what tropes there are.

76A Philosophers' Paradisenatural; they are not gruesome gerrymanders, not even mildly disjunctive.
(2) They are pervasive: mostly, or perhaps without exception, when thereis a chain of relations in the system running from one thing to another,
then also there is a direct relation. (3) They are discriminating: it is atleast possible, whether or not it happens at every world where the relationsare present, that there be a great many interrelated things, no two of whichare exactly alike with respect to their place in the structure of relations.
(4) They are external: they do not supervene on the intrinsic natures ofthe relata taken separately, but only on the intrinsic character of thecomposite of the relata. (See section 1.5. The definition of what it is fora relation to be external involved possibilia but not yet possible worlds,
and so is available at this point without circularity.) When a system ofrelations is analogous to the spatiotemporal relations, strictly so called,
let me call them analogically spatiotemporal.55I have some hope that it might be possible to bypass the messy idea ofanalogically spatiotemporal relations. A much simpler alternative wouldbe that worlds are unified by external interrelatedness, of whatever sort.
On this suggestion, any natural external relations will do to unify a world.
Every part of a world bears some such relation to every other part; butno part of one world ever bears any such relation to any part of another.
55There are three different conceptions of what the spatiotemporal relations might be.
There is the dualist conception: there are the parts of spacetime itself, and there are thepieces of matter or fields or whatnot that occupy some of the parts of spacetime. Thenthe spatiotemporal relations (strict or analogical) consist of distance relations that holdbetween parts of spacetime; relations of occupancy that hold between occupants and theparts of spacetime they occupy; and, derivatively from these, further distance relationsbetween the occupants, or between occupants and parts of spacetime.
There are two simpler monistic conceptions. One of them does away with the occupantsas separate things: we have the parts of spacetime, and their distance relations are theonly spatiotemporal relations. The properties that we usually ascribe to occupants ofspacetime - for instance, properties of mass, charge, field strength - belong in fact to partsof spacetime themselves. When a part of spacetime has a suitable distribution of localproperties, then it is a particle, or a piece of a field, or a donkey, or what have you.
The other monistic conception does the opposite: it does away with the parts of spacetimein favour of the occupants (now not properly so called), so that the only spatiotemporalrelations are the distance relations between some of these. I tend to oppose the thirdconception, at least as applied to our world, for much the reasons given in Nerlich, TheShape of Space. I tend, more weakly, to oppose the dualist conception as uneconomical.
I suppose it may be, however, that there are worlds of all three sorts; if so, that wouldgive more reason than ever to doubt that the same system of spatiotemporal relationsserves to unify all the worlds. Throughout this book, I shall presuppose that there aresuch things as spatiotemporal regions, whether or not there also are distinct things thatoccupy those regions. But I believe this presupposition plays no important role, and Icould have been more neutral at the cost of clumsier writing. I certainly don't mean tosuggest that the existence of spacetime and its parts is an essential tenet of modal realism.

Isolation77Never mind whether the relations in question are spatiotemporal, eitherstrictly or analogically.
If the simplification is to have a hope, the restriction to natural relationsmust bear a good deal of weight. It will have to exclude more than justthe gruesome gerrymanders. For what about the relation of non-identity?
(Here I am indebted to discussion with James Grieve.) It qualifies onmy definition as an external relation, and it obtains invariably betweenthe particular parts of different worlds. However, we may fairly denyit a place in our select inventory of the natural relations. It would besuperfluous to include it if we have the resources to introduce it bydefinition; and we do, since X and Y are non-identical iff there is a classthat one of X and Y belongs to and the other does not. (If you thinkthere is need to cover non-identity of 'proper classes' you should adda clause: . . or there is something that belongs to one of X and Y butnot the other'.)
I find it hard to say whether this simplification could succeed. Myproblem is a lack of test cases. What natural external relations could therebe besides the (strictly or analogically) spatiotemporal relations? I wouldreject some candidates for further external relations that might be offered:
for instance, primitive genidentity relations, non-qualitative counterpartrelations (see section 4.4), or a primitive worldmate relation.
Perhaps the following will do as a test case. If so, it looks unfavourablefor the simplification. We tend to think that positive and negative chargeare natural intrinsic properties of particles; but suppose not. Supposeinstead there are natural external relations of like-chargedness andopposite-chargedness. (Then we can introduce extrinsic versions of thecharge properties. To be neutral is to be like-charged to some particlesand opposite-charged to none; to be negative is to be like-charged to mostof the lightweight particles that orbit much heavier clumps of particleshereabouts; and to be positive is to be opposite-charged to a negativeparticle.) On this view, as opposed to the standard view, the relationsof like- and opposite-chargedness do not supervene on the intrinsic naturesof two particles taken separately; an electron and a positron may be perfectintrinsic duplicates. That is the point of calling the relations external.
They are natural ex hypothesi. They are pervasive (at least, given theappropriate laws) in what whenever two particles are connected by a chainof such relations, they are connected directly. But they are very far fromdiscriminating (again, given the appropriate laws): if there are as few asthree particles, there must be two of them that are alike so far as theserelations are concerned. If this story, or something like it, could be true,
then here we have external relations that are not strictly or analogicallyspatiotemporal.
Could two particles in different worlds stand in these external relationsof like- or opposite-chargedness? So it seems, offhand; and if so, then

78A Philosophers' Paradisethe simplification fails. I would welcome a reason why particles at differentworlds cannot stand in these relations - other than a verificationist reasonthat I would find unpersuasive - but failing such a reason, I am inclinedto reject the simplification. Then I must stick instead with myunderdeveloped suggestion that the unifying external relations have tobe, if not strictly spatiotemporal, at least analogically spatiotemporal.
There is a second way in which the worlds are isolated: there is no causationfrom one to another. If need be, I would put this causal isolation alongsidespatiotemporal isolation as a principle of demarcation for worlds. Butthere is no need. Under a counterfactual analysis of causation, the causalisolation of worlds follows automatically. Therefore it contributes nothingto the demarcation of one world from another. No matter how we solvethe demarcation problem, trans-world causation comes out as nonsense.
When we have causation within a world, what happens is roughly asfollows. (For simplicity I ignore complications having to do with causalpre-emption and overdetermination, and with the idealisation of supposingthat we always have closest antecedent-worlds. Taking these matters intoaccount would do nothing in favour of trans-world causation.) We havea world W where event C causes event E. Both these events occur at W,
and they are distinct events, and it is the case at W that if C had notoccurred, E would not have occurred either. The counterfactual meansthat at the closest worlds to W at which C does not occur, E does notoccur either.
Try to adapt this to a case of trans-world causation, in which the eventsof one world supposedly influence those of another. Event C occurs atworld Wc, event E occurs at world EE, they are distinct events, and ifC had not occurred, E would not have occurred either. This counterfactualis supposed to hold - where? It means that at the closest worlds to -
where? - at which C does not occur, E does not occur - where? - either.
Normally the counterfactual is supposed to hold at the world wherethe one event causes the other; so maybe if the causation goes betweentwo worlds, the counterfactual ought to hold at both. So we have:
(1)at the closest worlds to We at which C does not occur, E does notoccur either, and(2)at the closest worlds to WE at which C does not occur, E does notoccur either.
But (1) looks wrong: since we are looking at a supposed case of trans-
world causation, it is irrelevant to ask whether we get E at worlds closeto Wc ; we ought to be looking at worlds close to WE, the world wherethe supposed effect did take place. And (2) looks even worse: we ought

Isolation79to be hypothesising the removal of C from a world like Wc : removingit from a world like WE is irrelevant. In fact, the closest world to WEat which C does not occur might very well be WE itself!
So should we make sure that we make our revisions to the right worldsby specifying explicitly which worlds the events are to be removed from?
Like this:
(1 ' ) at the closest worlds to Wc at which C does not occur at Wc, Edoes not occur at WE, and(2 ' ) at the closest worlds to WE at which C does not occur at Wc, Edoes not occur at WE.
But this is worse than ever. What can these double modifications mean:
at this world, an event does not occur at that world? C just does occurat Wc, E just does occur at WE; there is no world at which these factsare otherwise. You might as well say that in Auckland it rains inMelbourne, but in Wellington it doesn't rain in Melbourne. There is noway to make literal sense of this, unless by taking the outer modifier asvacuous. (That is why you instantly thought of two ways to make non-
literal sense of it: in Auckland they say it rains in Melbourne, but theydon't say so in Wellington; it rains a lot in Melbourne compared toAuckland, but not compared to Wellington.)
Try this. As the one world is to ordinary causation, so the pair of worldsis to trans-world causation. So put pairs for single worlds throughout:
(3) at the closest world-pairs to the pair <Wc, WE) such that C doesnot occur at the first world of the pair, E does not occur at the secondworld of the pair.
This makes sense, but not I think in a way that could make it true. ForI suppose that the closeness of one world-pair to another consists of thecloseness of the first worlds of the pairs together with the closeness ofthe second worlds of the pairs. We have to depart from Wc for the firstworld of a closest pair, since we have to get rid of C. But we are notlikewise forced to depart from WE for the second world of a closest pair,
and what is so close to a world as that world itself? So the second worldof any closest pair will just be WE, at which E does occur, so (3) is false.
(If there were significant external relations between worlds, that mightprovide another respect of comparison for world-pairs. But to this I say,
first, that even if trans-world external relations are not absolutelyforbidden by our solution to the problem of demarcation, the permittedones would be such things as our imagined relations of like- and opposite-
chargedness, which don't seem to do anything to help (3) to come true;

80A Philosophers' Paradiseand second, that if our special world-pair counterfactuals are supposedto make for causal dependence, they had better be governed by the samesort of closeness that governs ordinary causal counterfactuals, but ordinarycloseness of worlds does not involve any trans-world external relationsthat might make world-pairs close.)
When it seems to us as if we can understand trans-world causation,
I think that what must be happening is as follows. We think of the totalityof all the possible worlds as if it were one grand world, and that startsus thinking that there are other ways the grand world might have been.
So perhaps what we really have in mind is:
(4) at the closest alternative grand worlds to ours where C does notoccur in the part corresponding to Wc , E does not occur in the partcorresponding to WE.
But this is thoroughly misguided. If I am right, the many worlds alreadyprovide for contingency, and there is no sense in providing for it all overagain. Or else I am wrong, and the many worlds do not provide for genuinecontingency. (As some think; see section 2.1.) But then it makes no senseto repeat the very method you think has failed, only on a grander scale.
The worlds are all of the maximal things that are suitably unified. If theyfall into grand clusters, and yet grander clusters of clusters, and so on,
that is neither here nor there. By 'worlds' I still mean all the worlds. (Andhow could they fall into clusters - what sort of relation could unify a clusterwithout also merging the worlds within it?) There is but one totality ofworlds; it is not a world; it could not have been different. Therefore (4)
is nonsense, intelligible only if taken as vacuous.
So there isn't any trans-world causation. And not because I so stipulateas a principle of demarcation, but as a consequence of my analyses ofcausation and of counterfactuals. This is the real reason why there couldn'tbe a very powerful telescope for viewing other worlds. The obstacle isn'tthat other worlds are too far away, as Kripke jokingly says; and it isn'tthat they're somehow 'abstract', as of course he really thinks. (See Namingand Necessity, pages 44 and 19.) Telescopic viewing, like other methodsof gathering information, is a causal process: a 'telescope' which producedimages that were causally independent of the condition of the thing`viewed' would be a bogus telescope. No trans-world causation, no trans-
world telescopes.
Likewise, if there is no trans-world causation, there is no trans-worldtravel. You can't get into a `logical-space ship' and visit another possibleworld. You could get into what you confusedly think is a logical-spaceship, turn the knob, and disappear. And a perfect duplicate of you atyour disappearance, surrounded by a perfect duplicate of your ship, couldappear ex nihilo at some other world. Indeed, there are plenty of worlds

Concreteness81where aspiring logical-space travellers disappear, and plenty of worldswhere they appear, and plenty of qualitative duplications between onesthat disappear and ones that appear. But none of this is travel unless thereis one surviving traveller who both departs and arrives. And causalcontinuity is required for survival; it is a principal part of what unifiesa persisting person. It is so within a single world: if there is a demonwho destroys people at random, and another who creates people atrandom, and by a very improbable coincidence the creating demon replacesa victim of the destroying demon, the qualitative continuity could beperfect, but the lack of causal dependence would still make it not be agenuine case of survival. Likewise across worlds. No trans-worldcausation, no trans-world causal continuity; no causal continuity, nosurvival; no survival, no travel. All those people in various worlds whomeet their ends in `logical-space ships', as well as the more fortunate oneswho appear ex nihilo in such ships, are sadly deluded.
But if you'd like to see a world where Napoleon conquered all, don'tgive up hope. Maybe ours is one of those big worlds with many world-
like parts, spatiotemporally related in some peculiar way. Then you mightget your wish, near enough, by means of a special telescope or a specialspaceship that operates entirely within our single world. You won't seethe world-like part where Napoleon himself is, of course; you're therealready, and he didn't conquer all. But I presume you'd be content witha world-like part where the conqueror was an excellent counterpart ofNapoleon. I would be the last to denounce decent science fiction asphilosophically unsound. No; tales of viewing or visiting 'other worlds'are perfectly consistent. They come true at countless possible worlds. It'sjust that the 'other worlds' that are viewed or visited never can be whatI call 'other worlds'.
1.7 ConcretenessBecause I said that other worlds are of a kind with this world of ours,
doubtless you will expect me to say that possible worlds and individualsare concrete, not abstract. But I am reluctant to say that outright. Notbecause I hold the opposite view; but because it is not at all clear to mewhat philosophers mean when they speak of 'concrete' and 'abstract' inthis connection. Perhaps I would agree with it, whatever it means, butstill I do not find it a useful way of explaining myself.
I can say this much, even without knowing what 'concrete' is supposedto mean. I take it, at least, that donkeys and protons and puddles andstars are supposed to be paradigmatically concrete. I take it also that thedivision between abstract and concrete is meant to divide entities intofundamentally different kinds. If so, then it is out of the question that

82A Philosophers' Paradisean abstract entity and a concrete entity should be exactly alike, perfectduplicates. According to my modal realism, the donkeys and protons andpuddles and stars that are parts of this world have perfect duplicates thatare parts of other worlds. This suffices to settle, whatever exactly it maymean, that at least some possible individuals are 'concrete'. And if so,
then at least some possible worlds are at least partly 'concrete'.
A spectator might well assume that the distinction between 'concrete'and 'abstract' entities is common ground among contemporary philos-
ophers, too well understood and uncontroversial to need any explaining.
But if someone does try to explain it, most likely he will resort to one(or more) of four ways.56First, the Way of Example: concrete entities are things like donkeysand puddles and protons and stars, whereas abstract entities are thingslike numbers. That gives us very little guidance. First, because we haveno uncontroversial account of what numbers are. Are the paradigms ofabstractness meant to be the von Neumann ordinals - certain pure sets?
Are they meant to be structural universals, instantiated here and therewithin our world, like the tripartiteness that is instantiated wherever thereis a proton composed of quarks (if quarks themselves are mereologicalatoms)? Are they 'irreducible sui generis abstract entities'? And even givena useful account of the nature of numbers, there are just too many waysthat numbers differ from donkeys et al. and we still are none the wiserabout where to put a border between donkey-like and number-like.
At least the Way of Example has something to say about some partsof other worlds. As noted above, some parts of other worlds are exactlylike donkeys, because they are donkeys, so those at any rate areparadigmatically concrete. Likewise for other-worldly puddles and protonsand stars. So far, so good. But other parts of other worlds are, forinstance, chunks of other-worldly spacetime - are those paradigmaticallyconcrete? And if ordinary particulars contain universals or tropes as (non-
spatiotemporal) parts, then worlds composed of ordinary particulars willin turn have universals or tropes as parts; in which case not all the partsof worlds are paradigmatically concrete. Indeed we might contemplatea theory of numbers - one which says, for instance, that the number threeis the structural universal of tripartiteness - according to which some partsof worlds would turn out to be paradigmatically abstract.
And what of a whole world? Is it sufficiently donkey-like, despite its561 shall pass over a fifth way, offered by Dummett in chapter 14 of Frege: Philosophyof Language, in which the distinction between abstract and concrete entities is drawn interms of how we could understand their names. Even if this fifth way succeeds in drawinga border, as for all I know it may, it tells us nothing directly about how the entities onopposite sides of that border differ in their nature. It is like saying that snakes are theanimals we instinctively most fear - maybe so, but it tells us nothing about the natureof snakes.

Concreteness83size? And perhaps despite the fact that it consists mostly of emptyspacetime? I am inclined to say that, according to the Way of Example,
a world is concrete rather than abstract - more donkey-like than number-
like. I am also inclined to say that a world is more like a raven than awriting-desk; and that it is ping rather than pong. But I know not why.
Second, the Way of Conflation: the distinction between concrete andabstract entities is just the distinction between individuals and sets, orbetween particulars and universals, or perhaps between particularindividuals and everything else. That accords well enough with ourexamples. It is safe to say that donkeys and the like are particularindividuals, not universals or sets. It is a defensible, if not trouble-free,
view that numbers are sets; alternatively, it is arguable that they areuniversals. So far, so good. I say that worlds are individuals, not sets.
I say that worlds are particulars, not universals. So according to the Wayof Conflation in either version, I say that worlds are concrete.
Third, the Negative Way: abstract entities have no spatiotemporallocation; they do not enter into causal interaction; they are neverindiscernible one from another.
The Negative Way and the Way of Conflation seem to disagree ratherbadly. As for the first part, the denial that abstract entities are located,
I object that by this test some sets and universals come out concrete. Setsare supposed to be abstract. But a set of located things does seem to havea location, though perhaps a divided location: it is where its membersare. Thus my unit set is right here, exactly where I am; the set of youand me is partly here where I am, partly yonder where you are; and soon. And universals are supposed to be abstract. But if a universal is whollypresent in each of many located particulars, as by definition it is, thatmeans that it is where its instances are. It is multiply located, not unlocated.
You could just declare that an abstract entity is located only in the specialway that a set or a universal is located - but then you might as well justsay that to be abstract is to be a set or universal. Your talk of unlocatednessadds nothing. Maybe a pure set, or an uninstantiated universal, has nolocation. However these are the most dispensable and suspect of sets anduniversals. If it is said that sets or universals generally are unlocated,
perhaps we have a hasty generalisation. Or perhaps we have an inference:
they're unlocated because they're abstract. If so, we had better not alsosay that they're abstract because they're unlocated.
As for the second part, the denial that abstract entities enter into causalinteraction, this too seems to disagree with the Way of Conflation. Isit true that sets or universals cannot enter into causal interaction? Whyshouldn't we say that something causes a set of effects? Or that a setof causes, acting jointly, causes something? Or that positive charge causeseffects of a characteristic kind whenever it is instantiated? Many authorshave proposed to identify an event - the very thing that most surely can

84A Philosophers' Paradisecause and be caused - with one or another sort of set. (For instance, in`Events' I propose to identify an event with the set of spacetime regionswhere it occurs.) Must any such identification be rejected, regardless ofthe economies it may afford, just because sets are supposed to be`abstract'?
As for the third part, the denial that abstract entities can be indiscernible,
indeed I do not see what could be said in favour of indiscernible universals.
But as for sets, I should think that if two individuals are indiscernible,
then so are their unit sets; and likewise whenever sets differ only by asubstitution of indiscernible individuals. So, pace the Way of Conflation,
it seems that the Negative Way does not classify universals, or sets ingeneral, as abstract.
What does it say about worlds? Other worlds and their parts certainlystand in no spatiotemporal or causal relations to us. Worlds arespatiotemporally and causally isolated from one another; else they wouldbe not whole worlds, but parts of a greater world. But by the same token,
we stand in no spatiotemporal or causal relation to them. That doesn'tmake us abstract. It's no good saying that, for us, we are concrete andan other-worldly being is abstract; whereas, for that other-worldly being,
he is concrete and we are abstract. For one thing is certain: whatever theabstract-concrete distinction is, at least it's supposed to be a veryfundamental difference between two kinds of entities. It has no businessbeing a symmetrical and relative affair.
So the right question is: do other worlds and their parts stand inspatiotemporal and causal relations to anything? Parts of worlds do: theystand in (strictly or analogically) spatiotemporal relations, and in causalrelations, to other parts of their own worlds. (With exceptions. Maybea tiny world might have only one part. A chaotic and lawless world mighthave no causation. But I presume we don't want to say that parts of worldsare abstract in these special cases, concrete otherwise.) Whole worlds,
however, cannot stand in spatiotemporal and causal relations to anythingoutside themselves, and it seems that nothing can stand in such relationsto its own parts. Should we conclude that worlds - including the one weare part of - are abstract wholes made of concrete parts? Perhaps, indeed,
divisible exhaustively into concrete parts? That seems unduly literalistic -
presumably the Negative Way should be construed charitably, so thatwholes can inherit concreteness from their parts. As for indiscernibility,
I have no idea whether there are indiscernible worlds; but certainly thereare indiscernible parts of worlds, for instance indiscernible epochs of aworld of two-way eternal recurrence. So according to the Negative Way,
charitably read, I say that worlds and their parts - including the universals,
if such there be! - are concrete.
Fourth, the Way of Abstraction: abstract entities are abstractions fromconcrete entities. They result from somehow subtracting specificity, so

Concreteness85that an incomplete description of the original concrete entity would bea complete description of the abstraction. This, I take it, is the historicallyand etymologically correct thing to mean if we talk of 'abstract entities'.
But it is by no means the dominant meaning in contemporary philosophy.
A theory of non-spatiotemporal parts of things, whether these berecurring universals or non-recurring tropes, makes good sense of someabstractions. We can say that unit negative charge is a universal commonto many particles, and is an abstraction from these particles just by beingpart of each of them. Or we can say that the particular negative chargeof this particular particle is part of it, but a proper part and in that sensean abstraction from the whole of it. But we cannot just identifyabstractions with universals or tropes. For why can we not abstract somehighly extrinsic aspect of something - say, the surname it bears? Or itsspatiotemporal location? Or its role in some causal network? Or its rolein some body of theory? All these are unsuitable candidates for genuineuniversals or tropes, being no part of the intrinsic nature of the thingwhence they are abstracted.
We can also make good sense of abstractions, or an adequate imitationthereof, by the stratagem of taking equivalence classes. For instance, weabstract the direction of a line from the line itself by taking the directionto be the class of that line and all other lines parallel to it. There is nogenuine subtraction of specific detail, rather there is multiplication ofit; but by swamping if not by removal, the specifics of the original lineget lost. For instance, the direction comprises many located lines; it islocated where its members are, namely everywhere; so it is not locatedmore one place than another, and that is the next best thing to not beinganywhere. But sets in general cannot be regarded thus as abstractions:
most sets are equivalence classes only under thoroughly artificialequivalences. (And the empty set is not an equivalence class at all.) Further,
if we abstract by taking equivalence classes, we need not start withparadigmatically concrete things. Thus directions may be abstracted fromlines, but the lines themselves may be taken as certain sets of quadruplesof real numbers.
So even if universals and equivalence classes are abstractions, it remainsthat the Way of Abstraction accords badly with the Ways of Exampleand of Conflation. It accords no better with the Negative Way: if wecan abstract the spatiotemporal location of something, that abstractionwill not be unlocated; rather, there will be nothing to it except location.
Likewise if we can abstract the causal role of something, then the onething the abstraction will do is enter into causal interactions.
Unless understood as universals or tropes or equivalence classes,
abstractions are obviously suspect. The inevitable hypothesis is that theyare verbal fictions: we say 'in the material mode' that we are speakingabout the abstraction when what's true is that we are speaking abstractly

86A Philosophers' Paradiseabout the original thing. We are ignoring some of its features, notintroducing some new thing from which those features are absent. Wepurport to speak of the abstraction 'economic man'; but really we arespeaking of ordinary men in an abstract way, confining ourselves to theireconomic activities.
According to the Way of Abstraction, I say that worlds are concrete.
They lack no specificity, and there is nothing for them to be abstractionsfrom. As for the parts of worlds, certainly some of them are concrete,
such as the other-worldly donkeys and protons and puddles and stars.
But if universals or tropes are non-spatiotemporal parts of ordinaryparticulars that in turn are parts of worlds, then here we have abstractionsthat are parts of worlds.
So, by and large, and with some doubts in connection with the Wayof Example and the Negative Way, it seems that indeed I should say thatworlds as I take them to be are concrete; and so are many of their parts,
but perhaps not all. But it also seems that to say that is to say somethingvery ambiguous indeed. It's just by luck that all its disambiguations makeit true.
1.8 PlenitudeAt the outset, I mentioned several ways that a world might be; and thenI made it part of my modal realism that(1)absolutely every way that a world could possibly be is a way thatsome world is, and(2)absolutely every way that a part of a world could possibly be isa way that some part of some world is.
But what does that mean? It seems to mean that the worlds are abundant,
and logical space is somehow complete. There are no gaps in logical space;
no vacancies where a world might have been, but isn't. It seems to bea principle of plenitude. But is it really?
Given modal realism, it becomes advantageous to identify 'ways a worldcould possibly be' with worlds themselves. Why distinguish two closelycorresponding entities: a world, and also the maximally specific way thatworld is? Economy dictates identifying the 'ways' with the worlds.
But as Peter van Inwagen pointed out to me, that makes (1) contentless.
It says only that every world is identical to some world. That would betrue even if there were only seventeen worlds, or one, or none. It saysnothing at all about abundance or completeness. Likewise for (2).

Plenitude 87Suppose we thought a maximally specific 'way' should be the samekind of things as a less specific 'way': namely a property, taken as a set.
Then a maximally specific 'way' would be a unit set. Now indeed the`ways' are distinct from the worlds. Further, they are abstract in whateversense sets are. But this does nothing to restore content to (1). A 'possibleway' is a non-empty set, and (1) now says trivially that each of the unitsets has a member.57Or perhaps a 'way' should be not a unit set, but an equivalence classunder indiscernibility. I am agnostic about whether there are indiscernibleworlds. If there are, I myself would wish to say that there are indiscernibleways a world could be, just as I would say that a world of two-way eternalrecurrence affords countless indiscernible ways - one per epoch - for aperson to be. But others might not like the idea of indiscernible 'ways'.
They might therefore welcome a guarantee that, whether or not worldsever are indiscernible, 'ways' never will be. Now (1) says trivially thateach of the equivalence classes has a member.
Or suppose we thought a 'way' should be the intrinsic nature of a world,
a highly complex structural universal (as in Forrest, 'Ways Worlds CouldBe'.) Given that thesis, a 'possible way' is an instantiated universal. Now(1) says trivially that each of these has a world to instantiate it.
We might read (1) as saying that every way we think a world couldpossibly be is a way that some world is; that is, every seemingly possibledescription or conception of a world does fit some world. Now we havemade (1) into a genuine principle of plenitude. But an unacceptable one.
So understood, (1) indiscriminately endorses offhand opinion about whatis possible.
I conclude that (1), and likewise (2), cannot be salvaged as principlesof plenitude. Let them go trivial. Then we need a new way to say what(1) and (2) seemed to say: that there are possibilities enough, and no gapsin logical space.
To which end, I suggest that we look to the Humean denial of necessaryconnections between distinct existences. To express the plenitude ofpossible worlds, I require a principle of recombination according to whichpatching together parts of different possible worlds yields another possible57Some critics have thought it very important that the 'ways' should be 'abstract'entities and distinct from the worlds. For instance, see Stalnaker, 'Possible Worlds'; andvan Inwagen, who writes 'the cosmos, being concrete, is not a way things could havebeen. . . . And surely the cosmos cannot itself be identical with any way the cosmos couldhave been: to say this would be like saying that Socrates is identical with the way Socratesis, which is plain bad grammar.' (`Indexicality and Actuality', page 406.) But to me, thechoice whether to take a 'way' as a unit set or as its sole member seems to be of the utmostunimportance, on a par with the arbitrary choice between speaking of a set or of itscharacteristic function.

88A Philosophers' Paradiseworld. Roughly speaking, the principle is that anything can coexist withanything else, at least provided they occupy distinct spatiotemporalpositions. Likewise, anything can fail to coexist with anything else. Thusif there could be a dragon, and there could be a unicorn, but there couldn'tbe a dragon and a unicorn side by side, that would be an unacceptablegap in logical space, a failure of plenitude. And if there could be a talkinghead contiguous to the rest of a living human body, but there couldn'tbe a talking head separate from the rest of a human body, that too wouldbe a failure of plenitude.
(I mean that plenitude requires that there could be a separate thingexactly like a talking head contiguous to a human body. Perhaps youwould not wish to call that thing a 'head', or you would not wish to callwhat it does 'talking'. I am somewhat inclined to disagree, and somewhatinclined to doubt that usage establishes a settled answer to such a far-
fetched question; but never mind. What the thing may be called is entirelybeside the point. Likdwise when I speak of possible dragons or unicorns,
I mean animals that fit the stereotypes we associate with those names.
I am not here concerned with Kripke's problem of whether such animalsare rightly called by those names.)
I cannot altogether accept the formulation: anything can coexist withanything. For I think the worlds do not overlap, hence each thing is partof only one of them. A dragon from one world and a unicorn from asecond world do not themselves coexist either in the dragon's world, orin the unicorn's world, or in a third world. An attached head does notreappear as a separated head in some other world, because it does notreappear at all in any other world.
Ordinarily I would replace trans-world identity by counterpart relations,
but not here. I cannot accept the principle: a counterpart of anythingcan coexist with a counterpart of anything else. Counterparts are unitedby similarity, but often the relevant similarity is mostly extrinsic. Inparticular, match of origins often has decisive weight. Had my early yearsgone differently, I might be different now in ever so many importantways - here I envisage an other-worldly person who is my counterpartmainly by match of origins, and very little by intrinsic similarity in laterlife. It might happen (at least under some resolutions of the vaguenessof counterpart relations) that nothing could be a counterpart of the dragonunless a large part of its surrounding world fairly well matched thedragon's world; and likewise that nothing could be a counterpart of theunicorn unless a large part of its surrounding world fairly well matchedthe unicorn's world; and that no one world matches both the dragon'sworld and the unicorn's world well enough; and therefore that there isno world where a counterpart of the dragon coexists with a counterpartof the unicorn. Considered by themselves, the dragon and the unicorn

Plenitude89are compossible. But if we use the method of counterparts, we do notconsider them by themselves; to the extent that the counterpart relationheeds extrinsic similarities, we take them together with their surroundings.
It is right to formulate our principle of recombination in terms ofsimilarity. It should say, for instance, that there is a world where somethinglike the dragon coexists with something like the unicorn. But extrinsicsimilarity is irrelevant here, so I should not speak of coexistingcounterparts. Instead, I should say that a duplicate of the dragon anda duplicate of the unicorn coexist at some world, and that the attachedtalking head has at some world a separated duplicate.
Duplication is a matter of shared properties, but differently situatedduplicates do not share all their properties. In section 1.5, I definedduplication in terms of the sharing of perfectly natural properties, thendefined intrinsic properties as those that never differ between duplicates.
That left it open that duplicates might differ extrinsically in their relationto their surroundings. Duplicate molecules in this world may differ inthat one is and another isn't part of a cat. Duplicate dragons in differentworlds may differ in that one coexists with a unicorn and the other doesn't.
Duplicate heads may differ in that one is attached to the rest of a humanbody and the other isn't.
Not only two possible individuals, but any number should admit ofcombination by means of coexisting duplicates. Indeed, the number mightbe infinite. Further, any possible individual should admit of combinationwith itself: if there could be a dragon, then equally there could be twoduplicate copies of that dragon side by side, or seventeen or infinitelymany.
But now there is trouble. Only a limited number of distinct things cancoexist in a spacetime continuum. It cannot exceed the infinite cardinalnumber of the points in a continuum. So if we have more than continuummany possible individuals to be copied, or if we want more than continuummany copies of any single individual, then a continuum will be too smallto hold all the coexisting things that our principle seems to require.
Should we keep the principle of recombination simple and unqualified,
follow where it leads, and conclude that the possible size of spacetimeis greater than we might have expected? That is tempting, I agree. AndI see no compelling reason why a possible spacetime can never exceedthe size of a continuum. But it seems very fishy if we begin with a principlethat is meant to express plenitude about how spacetime might be occupied,
and we find our principle transforming itself unexpectedly so as to yieldconsequences about the possible size of spacetime itself.
Our principle therefore requires a proviso: 'size and shape permitting'.
The only limit on the extent to which a world can be filled with duplicatesof possible individuals is that the parts of a world must be able to fit

90A Philosophers' Paradisetogether within some possible size and shape of spacetime. Apart fromthat, anything can coexist with anything, and anything can fail to coexistwith anything.
This leaves a residual problem of plenitude: what are the possible sizesand shapes of spacetime? Spacetimes have mathematical representations,
and an appropriate way to state plenitude would be to say that for everyrepresentation in some salient class, there is a world whose spacetime isthus represented. It is up to mathematics to offer us candidates for the`salient class'. (See section 2.2 for further discussion.)
We sometimes persuade ourselves that things are possible by experimentsin imagination. We imagine a horse, imagine a horn on it, and therebywe are persuaded that a unicorn is possible. But imaginability is a poorcriterion of possibility. We can imagine the impossible, provided we donot imagine it in perfect detail and all at once. We cannot imagine thepossible in perfect detail and all at once, not if it is at all complicated.
It is impossible to construct a regular polygon of nineteen sides with rulerand compass; it is possible but very complicated to construct one ofseventeen sides. In whatever sense I can imagine the possible construction,
I can imagine the impossible construction just as well. In both cases, Iimagine a texture of arcs and lines with the polygon in the middle. I donot imagine it arc by arc and line by line, just as I don't imagine thespeckled hen speckle by speckle - which is how I fail to notice theimpossibility.
We get enough of a link between imagination and possibility, but nottoo much, if we regard imaginative experiments as a way of reasoninginformally from the principle of recombination. To imagine a unicornand infer its possibility is to reason that a unicorn is possible becausea horse and a horn, which are possible because actual, might be juxtaposedin the imagined way.
In 'Propositional Objects' Quine suggested that we might take a possibleworld as a mathematical representation: perhaps a set of quadruples ofreal numbers, regarded as giving the coordinates of the spacetime pointsthat are occupied by matter. His method could be extended to allow forvarious sizes and shapes of spacetime, for occupancy by different kindsof matter and by point-sized bits of fields, and perhaps even for occupancyof times by non-spatial things. In section 3.2, I shall argue that we shouldnot identify the worlds with any such mathematical representations.
However we should accept a correspondence: for every Quinean ersatzworld, there is a genuine world with the represented pattern of occupancyand vacancy. This is just an appeal to recombination. But we are no longerapplying it to smallish numbers of middle-sized things, horses or hornsof heads. Instead, we are applying it to point-sized things, spacetime points

Plenitude91themselves or perhaps point-sized bits of matter or of fields. Starting withpoint-sized things that are uncontroversially possible, perhaps becauseactual, we patch together duplicates of them in great number (continuummany, or more) to make an entire world. The mathematical representationsare a book-keeping device, to make sure that the 'size and shapepermitting' proviso is satisfied.
Another use of my principle is to settle - or as opponents might say, tobeg - the question whether laws of nature are strictly necessary. They arenot; or at least laws that constrain what can coexist in different positionsare not. Episodes of bread-eating are possible because actual; as areepisodes of starvation. Juxtapose duplicates of the two, on the groundsthat anything can follow anything; here is a possible world to violatethe law that bread nourishes. So likewise against the necessity of moreserious candidates for fundamental laws of nature - perhaps with theexception of laws constraining what can coexist at a single position, forinstance the law (if such it be) that nothing is both positive and negativein charge. It is no surprise that my principle prohibits strictly necessaryconnections between distinct existences. What I have done is to take aHumean view about laws and causation, and use it instead as a thesisabout possibility. Same thesis, different emphasis.
Among all the possible individuals there are, some are parts of this world;
some are not, but are duplicates of parts of this world; some, taken whole,
are not duplicates of any part of this world, but are divisible into partseach of which is a duplicate of some part of this world. Still other possibleindividuals are not thus divisible: they have parts, no part of which isa duplicate of any part of this world. These I call alien individuals. (Thatis, they are alien to this world; similarly, individuals could be alien toanother world. For instance, many individuals in this world are alien tomore impoverished worlds.) A world that contains alien individuals -
equivalently, that is itself an alien individual - I call an alien world.
In 'New Work for a Theory of Universals', I defined an alien naturalproperty as one that is not instantiated by any part of this world, andthat is not definable as a conjunctive or structural property build up fromconstituents that are all instantiated by parts of this world.58 Anythingthat instantiates an alien property is an alien individual; any world withinwhich an alien property is instantiated is an alien world.
But not conversely: we could have an alien individual that did notinstantiate any alien properties, but instead combined non-alien properties58Perhaps, as Armstrong has suggested in discussion, I should have added a thirdclause: `. . . and that is not obtainable by interpolation or extrapolation from a spectrumof properties that are instantiated by parts of this world'.

92A Philosophers' Paradisein an alien way. Suppose that positive and negative charge are not, strictlyspeaking, incompatible; but suppose it happens by accident or bycontingent law that no this-worldly particle has both these properties.
Then an other-worldly particle that does have both is an alien individualbut needn't have any alien properties.
A world to which no individuals, worlds, or properties are alien wouldbe an especially rich world. There is no reason to think we are privilegedto inhabit such a world. Therefore any acceptable account of possibilitymust make provision for alien possibilities.
So it won't do to say that all worlds are generated by recombinationfrom parts of this world, individuals which are possible because they areactual. We can't get the alien possibilities just by rearranging non-alienones. Thus our principle of recombination falls short of capturing allthe plenitude of possibilities.
A principle which allowed not only recombination of spatiotemporalparts of the world but also recombination of non-spatiotemporal parts -
universals or tropes - would do a bit more. It would generate those alienindividuals that do not instantiate alien properties. But I say (1) that sucha principle, unlike mine, would sacrifice neutrality about whether thereexist universals or tropes, and (2) that it still wouldn't go far enough,
since we also need the possibility of alien properties.
Although recombination will not generate alien worlds out of the partsof this world, it nevertheless applies to alien worlds. It rules out that thereshould be only a few alien worlds. If there are some, there are many more.
Anything alien can coexist, or fail to coexist, with anything else alien,
or with anything else not alien, in any arrangement permitted by shapeand size.
1.9 ActualityI say that ours is one of many worlds. Ours is the actual world; the restare not actual. Why so? - I take it to be a trivial matter of meaning. Iuse the word 'actual' to mean the same as `this-worldly'. When I use it,
it applies to my world and my worldmates; to this world we are part of,
and to all parts of this world. And if someone else uses it, whether hebe a worldmate of ours or whether he be unactualised, then (providedhe means by it what we do) it applies likewise to his world and hisworldmates. Elsewhere I have called this the 'indexical analysis' ofactuality and stated it as follows.
I suggest that 'actual' and its cognates should be analyzed as indexical terms:
terms whose reference varies, depending on relevant features of the contextof utterance. The relevant feature of context, for the term 'actual', is the

Actuality93world at which a given utterance occurs. According to the indexical analysisI propose, 'actual' (in its primary sense) refers at any world w to the worldw. 'Actual' is analogous to 'present', an indexical term whose referencevaries depending on a different feature of context: 'present' refers at anytime t to the time t. `Actual' is analogous also to 'here', 'I', 'you', and`aforementioned' - indexical terms depending for their referencerespectively on the place, the speaker, the intended audience, the speaker'sacts of pointing, and the foregoing discourse. (`Anselm and Actuality',
pages 184-5.)
This makes actuality a relative matter: every world is actual at itself, andthereby all worlds are on a par. This is not to say that all worlds are actual -
there's no world at which that is true, any more than there's ever a timewhen all times are present. The 'actual at' relation between worlds is simplyidentity.
Given my acceptance of the plurality of worlds, the relativity isunavoidable. I have no tenable alternative. For suppose instead that oneworld alone is absolutely actual. There is some special distinction whichthat one world alone posseses, not relative to its inhabitants or to anythingelse but simpliciter. I have no idea how this supposed absolute distinctionmight be understood, but let us go on as if we did understand it. I raisetwo objections.
The first objection concerns our knowledge that we are actual. Notethat the supposed absolute distinction, even if it exists, doesn't make therelative distinction go away. It is still true that one world alone is ours,
is this one, is the one we are part of. What a remarkable bit of luck forus if the very world we are part of is the one that is absolutely actual!
Out of all the people there are in all the worlds, the great majority aredoomed to live in worlds that lack absolute actuality, but we are the selectfew. What reason could we ever have to think it was so? How could weever know? Unactualised dollars buy no less unactualised bread, and soforth. And yet we do know for certain that the world we are part of isthe actual world - just as certainly as we know that the world we are partof is the very world we are part of. How could this be knowledge thatwe are the select few?
D. C. Williams asks the same question. Not about 'actuality' but about`existence'; but it comes to the same thing, since he is discussing variousdoctrines on which so-called 'existence' turns out to be a special statusthat distinguishes some of the things there are from others. He complainsthat Leibniz 'never intimates, for example, how he can tell that he is amember of the existent world and not a mere possible monad on the shelfof essence' (`Dispensing with Existence', page 752).
Robert M. Adams, in 'Theories of Actuality', dismisses this objection.
He says that a simple-property theory of absolute actuality can accountfor the certainty of our knowledge of our own actuality by maintaining

94A Philosophers' Paradisethat we are as immediately acquainted with our own absolute actualityas we are with our thoughts, feelings, and sensations. But I reply thatif Adams and I and all the other actual people really have this immediateacquaintance with absolute actuality, wouldn't my elder sister have hadit too, if only I'd had an elder sister? So there she is, unactualised, offin some other world getting fooled by the very same evidence that issupposed to be giving me my knowledge.
This second objection concerns contingency. (It is due to Adams, andthis time he and I agree.) Surely it is a contingent matter which worldis actual. A contingent matter is one that varies from world to world.
At one world, the contingent matter goes one way; at another, another.
So at one world, one world is actual; and at another, another. How canthis be absolute actuality? - The relativity is manifest!
The indexical analysis raises a question. If 'actual' is an indexical, isit or is it not a rigidified indexical? In a context where other worlds areunder consideration, does it still refer to the world of utterance, or doesit shift its reference? Compare 'now', which is normally rigidified, with`present', which may or may not be. So you say 'Yesterday it was colderthan it is now', and even in the scope of the time-shifting adverb, 'now'still refers to the time of utterance. Likewise you say 'Yesterday it wascolder than it is at present', and the reference of 'present' is unshifted.
But if you say 'Every past event was once present', then the time-shiftingtensed verb shifts the reference of 'present'. I suggest that 'actual' andits cognates are like 'present': sometimes rigidified, sometimes not. Whatif I'd had an elder sister? Then there would have been someone whodoesn't actually exist. (Rigidified.) Then she would have been actual,
though in fact she is not. (Unrigidified.) Then someone would have beenactual who actually isn't actual. (Both together.) In the passage just quotedI called the unrigidified sense 'primary'; but not for any good reason.59I said that when I use it, 'actual' applies to my world and myworldmates; that is, to the world I am part of and to other parts of thatworld. Likewise, mutatis mutandis, when some other-worldly being usesthe word with the same meaning. But that left out the sets. I would notwish to say that any sets are parts of this or other worlds,6° butnevertheless I would like to say that sets of actual things are actual.
Sometimes we hear it said that sets are one and all unlocated; but I don'tknow any reason to believe this, and a more plausible view is that a set'For various examples that require or forbid rigidification if they are to make sense,
see my Philosophical Papers, volume I, page 22; for further discussion, see Hazen, 'Oneof the Truths about Actuality' and van Inwagen, `Indexicality and Actuality'.
60But not because I take it that the part—whole relation applies only to individuals andnot sets, as I said in Philosophical Papers, volume I, page 40; rather, because I now takeit that a set is never part of an individual.

Actuality95is where its members are. It is scattered to the extent that its membersare scattered; it is unlocated if, but only if, its members are unlocated.
That applies as much to location among the worlds as it does to locationwithin a single world. Just as a set of stay-at-home Australians is inAustralia, so likewise a set of this-wordly things is this-worldly, in otherwords actual. In the same way, a set of sets that are all in Australia isitself in Australia, and likewise a set of actual sets is itself actual; andso on up the iterative hierarchy.
I might sometimes prefer to use the word 'actual' a bit more broadlystill. There is no need to decide, once and for all and inflexibly, what isto be called actual. After all, that is not the grand question: what is there?
It is only the question which of all the things there are stand in somespecial relation to us, but there are special relations and there are specialrelations. Suppose there are things that are not our world, and not partsof our world, and not sets built up entirely from things that are partsof our world - but that I might nevertheless wish to quantify over evenwhen my quantification is otherwise restricted to this-worldly things. Ifso, no harm done if I sometimes call them 'actual' by courtesy. No harmdone, in fact, if I decline to adopt any official position on the questionwhether they are actual or whether they are not! It is no genuine issue.
The numbers, for instance, might well be candidates to be called 'actual'by courtesy. But it depends on what the numbers are. If they are universals,
and some or all of them are non-spatiotemporal parts of their this-worldlyinstances which in turn are parts of this world, then those numbers, atleast, are actual not by courtesy but because they are parts of this world.
Likewise for other mathematical entities.
Properties, taken as sets of all their this- and other-worldly instances,
are another candidate. By what I said above about actuality of sets, onlythose properties are actual whose instances are confined to the actualworld. But most of the properties we take an interest in have instancesboth in and out of this world. Those ones might be called 'partly actual';
or they might as well just be called 'actual', since very often we will wantto include them in our otherwise this-worldly quantifications.
Events fall in with the properties; for I see no reason to distinguishbetween an event and the property of being a spatiotemporal region, ofthis or another world, wherein that event occurs. (See my 'Events' .) Anevent that actually occurs, then, is a set that includes exactly one this-
worldly region. That makes it partly actual, and we may as well just callit 'actual'.
Propositions, being sets of worlds, also fall in with the properties takenas sets. A proposition is partly actual at just those worlds where it is true,
for it has just those worlds as its members. So we might call at least thetrue propositions 'actual' ; or we might just call all propositions 'actual',
distinguishing however between those that are and are not actually true.

96A Philosophers' ParadiseNot only sets but individuals may be partly actual - big individuals,
composed of parts from more worlds than one, and so partly in eachof several worlds. If there are any such trans-world individuals that arepartly in this world, hence partly actual, should we call them 'actual'simpliciter? - That depends. We needn't, if we think of them just asoddities that we can mostly ignore. I think they are exactly that. (Seesection 4.3.) But if we were reluctant to ignore them in our quantifying,
perhaps because we thought that we ourselves were among them, thenwe might appropriately call them 'actual' .6161In Philosophical Papers, volume I, pages 39-40, I distinguished three ways of 'beingin a world': (1) being wholly in it, that is, being part of it; (2) being partly in it, thatis, having a part that is wholly in it; and (3) existing from the standpoint of it, that is,
`belonging to the least restricted domain that is normally - modal metaphysics being deemedabnormal - appropriate in evaluating the truth at that world of quantifications'. If theworld in question is actual, that is almost my present distinction between being actual,
being partly actual, and being actual by courtesy; the only difference in the terminologiesbeing that I would not now throw all sets into the lower grade. I distinguish all of theabove from (4) existing according to a world: I claim that something exists according toa world - for instance, Humphrey both exists and wins the presidency according to certainworlds other than ours - by having a counterpart that is part of that world. On beingpart of versus existing according to, see section 4.1.

2Paradox in Paradise?
2.1 Everything is Actual?
In this chapter of objections and replies, I begin with four objectionsmeant to show that my modal realism, with the aid of uncontroversialauxiliary premises, leads to outright paradox. I reply by controvertingthe auxiliary premises. They may have something going for themintuitively, but I think they are not so compelling that I need count theirrejection as any great cost.
One line of argument holds that I misrepresent my own position. I oughtto say not that there are many possible worlds, and that ours is actualand the rest are unactualised. Instead I ought to say that actuality is muchbigger and much more fragmented than we ordinarily think. For it is atrivial matter of meaning that whatever there is, is actual. The word`actual' is a blanket term, like 'entity' or 'exists': it applies to everything.
Not just everything hereabouts, or everything suitably related to us, asI would have it; but everything without restriction. To say as I do thatsome things are unactualised is nonsense on a par with saying that somethings do not exist, or with Meinong's shocker: 'there are objects of whichit is true to say that there are no such objects' (`Uber Gegstandstheorie',
section 3). Actualism, the thesis that everything is actual, is not somemetaphysical thesis that one is free to affirm or deny; it is a trivial analytictruth. Its denial is unintelligible. Maybe there are 'other worlds' just asI say there are, spatiotemporally and causally isolated from us and allour surroundings. But if there are, then they are just some more ofactuality.
The objection has a second part. Since everything is actual, the otherworlds, if such there be, actually exist. Then it is not merely possible thatthey exist. They are not unactualised possibilities. In fact they have nothing97

98Paradox in Paradise?
to do with possibility. For possibility concerns not the far reaches ofactuality - not even the reaches of actuality that are spatiotemporallyisolated from us, if such there be - but rather it concerns alternatives toactuality. Actuality - all of it, no matter how much of it there is - mighthave been different, and that is what modality is all about. More ofactuality is no substitute for unactualised possibility.
This second part of the objection is less commonly made than the first.
But it may be what Peter van Inwagen is driving at when, after askingwhy I believe in (more than one of) the things I call worlds, he goes onto say that I 'face the problem of explaining what these things wouldhave to do with modality if there were any of them' (Plantinga on Trans-
World Identity', page 119). You might think that I have often explainedwhat these things have to do with modality, for instance by saying thatthe modal operators are quantifiers over them. Perhaps van Inwagen'simplicit point is that the modal operators, as ordinarily understood, cannotbe quantifiers over subdivisions of actuality. If so, I agree - but that isnot how I do explain them since, contra the first part of the objection,
you may take me at my word when I deny that other worlds are actual.
The second part of the objection relies on the first part, so if I answerthe first part I thereby deal with both.
Many philosophers have stated the first part of the objection in someform or other (two of the first were Richards and Haack), but none morevigorously than Lycan. He first distinguishes what he calls 'our original,
actuality-indicating quantifier' from my so-called `Meinongian' quantifierwhich does not indicate actuality. (He is not suggesting that I claim toquantify over incomplete or inconsistent Meinongian objects - of courseI do not - but only that I claim to quantify beyond actuality.) Then hegoes on to make very heavy weather over the latter.
I have to take my place among those who find Relentlessly (i.e., genuinelyor primitively) Meinongian quantification simply unintelligible. . . . I meanthat I really cannot understand Relentlessly Meinongian quantification atall; to me it is literally gibberish or mere noise. (`The Trouble with PossibleWorlds', page 290).
I think that what gives Lycan such bother is not the way I quantify. Iquantify just the way he or anyone else does: over all the entities I thinkthere are, or over less than all of them whenever it's convenient to imposesome restriction. Our quantifiers are common property. We don't needto learn them anew whenever we change our opinions about what thereis to quantify over. Lycan's real trouble is with what I mean by 'actual'.
He insists that it must be a blanket term. It must extend just as far asthe quantifiers themselves, when least restricted, however far that maybe. If so, then `Meinongian' quantification beyond the actual is nonsense

Everything is Actual?99indeed. I myself do not use 'actual' as a blanket term. I have alreadyexplained that I use it to mean 'this-worldly': it is an indexical, relativeterm, and as used by us it distinguishes our world and our worldmatesfrom all the other worlds and their inhabitants. But I do use 'entity' asa blanket term, and if ever you hear me claim to be quantifying overnonentities - quantifying genuinely and primitively, and without firstrestricting my use of 'entity' somehow - then you may fairly echo Lycan'sprotests.
Just as Lycan makes heavy weather over 'actual', someone could makeequally heavy weather over 'this-worldly', saying that there can be onlyone world, because - as a trivial matter of meaning - 'world' is a blanketterm for the totality of everything. Thus Richards: 'In short, the worldis what exists, and we cannot muck about with that' (`The Worlds ofDavid Lewis', page 108). Likewise Skyrms claims that whenever we havea class of truths, there must be one single world that they all describe -
even if what they purport to do is to describe many worlds! (PossibleWorlds, Physics and Metaphysics', pages 324-5.) If by definition 'theworld' comprises all there is, then to speak as I do of things that are outof this world is tantamount to speaking of things that are outside of allthere is - which is nonsense. But of course I do not use 'world' as a blanketterm; as Richards very well understands, since he challenges me to saywhat demarcates the worlds one from another. A very proper question,
which I have taken up in section 1.6; I hope that discussion went someway toward showing what 'world' could sensibly mean if it is not a blanketterm.
Nobody could have thought that I meant to use either 'actual' or 'world'as blanket terms. So if critics complain of paradox when I say that somethings are unactualised and out of this world, it must be because theythink those words are blanket terms willy-nilly. I cannot use them anyother way and still retain any contact with their common meaning. Butis that really so? Suppose we interviewed some spokesman for commonsense. I think we would find that he adheres firmly to three theses:
(1)Everything is actual.
(2)Actuality consists of everything that is spatiotemporally related tous, and nothing more (give or take some 'abstract entities'). It is notvastly bigger, or less unified, than we are accustomed to think.
(3) Possibilities are not parts of actuality, they are alternatives to it.
The first two theses cannot both be mere matters of meaning, trivialanalytic truths. Taken together, they say too much for that. My criticsclaim that the first is analytic, its denial is paradoxical or 'mere noise';
whereas the second is up for grabs. But I think the two theses, indeed

100Paradox in Paradise?
all three, are on an equal footing. Together they fix the meaning of`actual', but they go far beyond just fixing meanings. I don't see anyevidence that the analyticity is concentrated more in some of them thanin others. Common sense could have made up its communal mind wherethe analyticity resided - if we are right not to Quine the very idea ofanalyticity - but it had no need to settle that question, so very sensiblyit didn't bother to. Or so it seems to me; and after all, I speak as partyto the conventions of the community in question.
If so, then I am within my rights in standing with common opinionabout the unification and the extent of actuality, at the expense of commonopinion that everything is actual. I no more abandon the ordinary meaningthan I would if I did the opposite, as the critics advise. In denying thateverything is actual, I do of course disagree with common opinion. Iacknowledge that as a fair objection (see section 2.8) but it is far lessserious than the charge of paradox that was before us. I am not tryingto quantify over things such that there are no such things; so what I amsaying is not 'literal gibberish' - or even figurative.
Let us call the first and second theses together metaphysical actualism;
that is a substantive thesis about what there is. Let us call the first thesisby itself terminological actualism; that is more a proposal for how tospeak than a thesis of any kind. And let us call the thesis thatterminological actualism is analytic, and so may not intelligibly be rejected,
analytic actualism. I reject all three. Metaphysical and analytic actualismI reject as false. Terminological actualism I. reject as inadvisable, if wereject metaphysical actualism; and as not compulsory if we reject analyticactualism.
It is a mere matter of terminology whether to use 'actual' and 'world'as I do; but it does matter, because of the third of our three theses ofcommon sense. Analytic or not, it seems compelling. I too would findit very peculiar to say that modality, as ordinarily understood, isquantification over parts of actuality. If I were convinced that I oughtto call all the worlds actual - in which case also I might be reluctant tocall them worlds - then it would become very implausible to say that whatmight happen is what does happen at some or another world. If therewere a place left for unactualised possibilities at all, they would bepossibilities of a grander sort - not differences between the worlds, butother ways that the grand world, the totality that includes all my littleworlds, might have been. It would be useless to try again just as before,
and believe in a plurality of grand worlds; for if a plurality of worldsfalls victim to analytic actualism, then a plurality of grand worlds doestoo.1 All this would be a great defeat, given the theoretical benefits that'Skyrms conjures up the spectre of a regress from a plurality of worlds to a pluralityof grand worlds to a plurality of yet grander worlds . . . (Possible Worlds, Physics and

All Worlds in One?101modal realism brings. So it is fortunate indeed that there is no convincingreason to think it analytic that everything is actual.
We have not seen the last of terminological and analytic actualism.
As we proceed through other objections, often the critics will urge thatI ought to think of all the worlds together in some way that we areaccustomed to thinking of the actual world; and then they will say, rightly,
that it would be very peculiar to think in such a way. Well, why do Ihave to think things that would be so peculiar? I suppose their underlyingidea is that I should because I must: because it is a trivial analytic truththat everything is actual.
2.2 All Worlds in One?
Another line of argument seeks to entrap modal realism in paradoxesakin to those that refute naive set theory. Plausible premises about whatis possible turn out to afford ways of mapping arbitrary classes of worldsone to one onto single worlds, which leads at once to contradiction. Inreply, I must deny the plausible premises. Fortunately, I think I can arguethat they are suspect for independent reasons.
Forrest and Armstrong, in 'An Argument against David Lewis' Theoryof Possible Worlds', rely on an unqualified principle of recombinationto produce one such paradox. Say that a world copies a class of possibleindividuals, perhaps from various different worlds, iff it contains non-
overlapping duplicates of all the individuals in that class. The principleof recombination that I endorsed in section 1.8 says that, given a classof possible individuals, there is some world which copies that class.
However I insisted on qualifying the principle by the proviso: 'size andshape permitting'. The reason I gave for the proviso - and it seems tome a sufficient reason all on its own - was that without it, the principlewould deliver proofs that there are very large spacetimes, since if we hada class of more than continuum many possible individuals, they couldnot be copied into any merely continuum-sized spacetime; however 'itseems very fishy if we begin with a principle that is meant to expressplenitude about how spacetime might be occupied, and we find ourprinciple transforming itself unexpectedly so as to yield consequencesabout the possible size of spacetime itself.'
Metaphysics', pages 331-2.) The regress works by cycling around three assumptions: (1)
that 'reality' is the totality of everything, (2) that reality might have been different, and(3) that possible difference is to be understood in terms of a plurality of alternatives. Ireply that (1) and (2) aren't both right. Which one is wrong depends on whether we chooseto take 'reality' as a blanket term for everything, or as yet another word for the this-
worldly part of everything. That choice may be left unmade.

102Paradox in Paradise?
Forrest and Armstrong show that the unqualified principle is worsethan fishy. It leads to disaster. Even if we were content to follow whereit leads, we could not just concede that some worlds have enormouslybig spacetimes - far beyond the cardinality of the continuum - and leaveit at that. There is no equilibrium: the more we concede, the more theinsatiable principle demands. The more possible individuals there are,
the bigger can a class of them be. The bigger those classes can be, thebigger some worlds must be, if there is a world to copy every class. Butthe bigger some worlds are, the more possible individuals there are - andaround we go again. There is no stable resting place.
In more detail, their argument is as follows. Start with all the possibleworlds. Each one of them is a possible individual. Apply the unqualifiedprinciple of recombination to this class of possible individuals. Then wehave one big world which contains duplicates of all our original worldsas non-overlapping parts. But we started with all the worlds; so our bigworld must have been one of them. Then our big world is bigger thanitself; but no matter how big it is, it cannot be that.
The conclusion that the big world is bigger than itself requiresclarification, and a subsidiary argument. It is not good enough just tocomplain that it has an exact duplicate of the whole of itself as a properpart of itself. That is not objectionable; it happens at some perfectly decentpossible worlds. For instance, take a world of one-way eternal recurrence:
its proper part consisting of all but the first epoch (or the first seventeen,
or any number) is an exact duplicate of the whole of it.
Therefore Forrest and Armstrong suggest that we measure the size ofa world by the cardinality of the set of its electrons. Suppose the big worldhas K electrons in it; we may safely assume that K is some large infinitecardinal. Then there are 2K -1 non-empty subsets of the electrons of thebig world; and for every such subset, there is a world rather like the bigworld in which just those electrons remain and the rest have been deleted.
(I take this to be a subsidiary appeal to recombination.) Call these worldsvariants of the big world. (The big world itself is one of them.) Thereare 2K -1 variants; there are non-overlapping duplicates of all thesevariants within the big world; each variant contains at least one electron,
therefore so does each duplicate of a variant; so we have at least 2K -1electrons in the big world; but ex hypothesi we had only K electrons inthe big world; and 2K -1 must exceed K; so the big world has moreelectrons in it than it has. For a world to be bigger than itself in thatsense is indeed impossible; which completes the reductio.
I see Forrest and Armstrong as giving me a second reason, even moreconclusive than my previous reason (which was already good enough),
why the principle of recombination needs its qualifying proviso. Theirreductio shows that the proviso may not be dropped. But they insist that it

All Worlds in One?103must be dropped; it is the simpler, unqualified form of the principle thatis intuitively compelling. My proviso, if spelled out, would have to putsome restriction on the possible size of spacetime. Among themathematical structures that might be offered as isomorphs of possiblespacetimes, some would be admitted, and others would be rejected asoversized. Forrest and Armstrong say that such a restriction 'seems tobe ad hoc'. Maybe so; the least arbitrary restriction we could possiblyimagine is none at all, and compared to that any restriction whateverwill seem at least somewhat ad hoc. But some will seem worse than others.
A restriction to four-dimensional, or to seventeen-dimensional, manifoldslooks badly arbitrary; a restriction to finite-dimensional manifolds looksmuch more tolerable. Maybe that is too much of a restriction, anddisqualifies some shapes and sizes of spacetime that we would firmlybelieve to be possible. If so, then I hope there is some equally naturalbreak a bit higher up: high enough to make room for all the possibilitieswe really need to believe in, but enough of a natural break to make itnot intolerably ad hoc as a boundary.
My hope, notice, is just that some such break exists. I do not claimto make the worlds, and I do not claim to have some way of finding outall about them, therefore I will not be at all troubled if I cannot say justwhat break is right. My thesis is existential: there is some break, and thecorrect break is sufficiently salient within the mathematical universe notto be ad hoc. If study of the mathematical generalisations of ordinaryspacetime manifolds revealed one salient break, and one only, I woulddare to say that it was the right break - that there were worlds with allthe shapes and sizes of spacetime below it, and no worlds with any othershapes and sizes. If study revealed no suitable breaks, I would regardthat as serious trouble. If study revealed more than one suitable break,
I would be content to profess ignorance - incurable ignorance, most likely.
There is an alliance between what remains of the present objection -
namely, a complaint that there must be something arbitrary about theneeded restriction on shapes and sizes - and the objection considered inthe previous section. For when something seems arbitrary, we are aptto think that it might well have been different. If the restriction is anarbitrary feature of the totality of all possible worlds, then we are apt tothink that this totality could have been different. But if so, then there is apossible way for it to be which differs from the way it actually is - and weare back to thinking of the worlds not as genuine alternative possibilities,
but as parts of one big disunified actuality. All the more reason, I think,
why the restriction had better be some extremely natural break, so that(if we could know what it was) it would not strike us as arbitrary.
Forrest and Armstrong leave a loophole. Their premise that any number ofworlds can be copied into a single world - their appeal to recombination -

104Paradox in Paradise?
is meant to apply only if the worlds to be copied comprise a set oraggregate. So if there are the worlds, but there is no set or aggregate ofall of them, then the contradiction is dodged. Does this loophole giveme a way to do without the unwelcome proviso? I think not. (1) If wesay that a set or aggregate of possible individuals always can be copiedinto a single world, but we do not say the same for other classes, thatis already to qualify recombination in a way that detracts from itsplausibility. (2) Some uses of possibilia, for instance in constructingsemantic values for sentential modifiers (as in section 1.4), will requirethe forbidden sets. (3) How could the worlds possibly fail to comprisea set? We do say that according to the iterative conception of sets, someclasses are 'too big to be sets', but this is loose talk. Sheer size is notwhat matters; rather, the obstacle to sethood is that the members of theclass are not yet all present at any rank of the iterative hierarchy. Butall the individuals, no matter how many there may be, get in already onthe ground floor. So, after all, we have no notion what could stop anyclass of individuals - in particular, the class of all worlds - from comprisinga set. (4) Likewise we have no notion what could stop any class ofindividuals from comprising an aggregate.
So I continue to accept a set of all worlds, indeed a set of all individuals.
The Forrest-Armstrong reductio stands; but a reductio against theunqualified principle of recombination is not a reductio against my theoryof possible worlds, as they say it is. I do not accept the unqualifiedprinciple, and there is no strong reason why I should. It is a gift thatI do best to refuse.
2.3 More Worlds Than There Are?
Another paradox likewise works by embedding sets of worlds within singleworlds, but the embedding works differently. The set is embedded notby duplicating all its members into a single world, but rather by makingit the set of worlds that characterises the content of somebody's thought.
I believe the paradox is due to David Kaplan; I learned it from him circa1975. Recently it has been presented in Martin Davies's Meaning,
Quantification, Necessity, page 262, with credit to Kaplan and toChristopher Peacocke. Davies states it roughly as follows:
(1)Suppose that the cardinality of the set of possible worlds is K.
(2)Each subset of this set is a proposition, namely the proposition whichwould be expressed by a sentence which was true with respect to preciselythe worlds in that subset.
(3) There are 2K such propositions, and 2K is strictly greater than K.

More Worlds Than There Are?105(4)Consider some man and time. For each proposition, it is possiblethat he should have been thinking a thought at that time whose contentwould be specifiable by a sentence expressing that proposition; and thatthis should have been his only thought at that time.2(5)So there is a distinct possible situation corresponding to each suchproposition.
(6) So there are at least 2K possible worlds, contradicting theassumption with which we began.
Kaplan remarked that we could replace the thinker by a speaker, to givea semantic version of the paradox; in which case, (4) would say that foreach proposition, it is possible that the man at the time should have beenuttering a sentence that expressed that proposition, and that this shouldhave been his only utterance at that time.
(In section 1.4 I suggested that a content of thought should be givenby a set of possible individuals, not worlds, since the thought might beegocentric; or that it should be given not by a set of possibilities but bya probability distribution, to allow for partial belief; or that it shouldbe given not by one set or one distribution but by a class of them, sincethe man might be a compartmentalised doublethinker, or the content ofhis thought might be not fully determinate; or that all these amendmentsshould be made together. The amendments only make matters worse.
If they make a difference, it is by increasing the number of possiblecontents of the thinker's thought and the number of different possiblesituations. I ignore them henceforth.)
I reply by denying (4). Not just any set of worlds is a set that mightpossibly give the content of someone's thought. Most sets of work's, infact all but an infinitesimal minority of them, are not eligible contentsof thought. It is absolutely impossible that anybody should think a thoughtwith content given by one of these ineligible sets of worlds.
In my usage, any set of worlds is by definition a proposition. (See section1.5.) That is why I deny (4) and accept (2). But there is a conflicting usage,
2My only substantive change from Davies is the addition of this final clause in (4),
which seems to be required if (5) is to follow. Or else we could understand that the man'sthought is to be his total thought at the time; perhaps that is what Davies intended, inwhich case his original formulation will serve.
In a recent lecture (at the Seventh International Conference of Logic, Methodologyand Philosophy of Science, Salzburg, 1983) Kaplan has presented a more cautious versionof the paradox. Instead of affirming (4), he only insists that logicians qua logicians oughtnot implicitly deny (4). Their systems should be metaphysically neutral. 'As logicians,
we strive to serve philosophical ideologies not to constrain them.' Agreed - but I am nota logician, and metaphysical neutrality is not among my aims. Doubtless Kaplan, quaneutral logician, does not intend his paradox to impose any constraint adverse to the`ideology' of modal realism. Its proper moral is that the way of the neutralist is hard.

106Paradox in Paradise?
equally well established, on which the propositions are by definition thepossible contents of thought, whatever those may be. On that usage, (4)
is unexceptionable, and I deny (2) instead. The terminological issue isavoided so long as I just say: not all sets of worlds, in fact only veryfew of them, are possible contents of thought.
I would take the paradox as reason enough to deny that just any setof worlds gives the content of some possible thought. But I think thatI have independent reason as well.
My reason does not rest on our human limitations: that we are onlyjust so smart, we have only just so many neurons, we live only just somany years, . . . . For the 'man' in the paradox needn't be subject tohuman limitations. He can be as smart as any man could possibly be;
and smarter than any man could possibly be under the actual laws ofnature, since he might live under other laws. He needn't be a man at all;
he might be a god. Not an impossible god, because there are none ofthose thinking anything at any worlds at all; but he can be as smart asa god can possibly be. He can have as much ability to think many differentthoughts as it is possible for any thinker to have.
Instead, I ask: what makes it so that a thinker has a thought with acertain content? And to this question, I take it that a broadly functionalistanswer is right. A man or a beast or a god, or anything that is a thinkerat all, has a thought with a certain content in virtue of being in a statewhich occupies a certain functional role. This definitive functional rolehas to do with the causal relations of that state to the thinker's sensoryinput, his behavioural output, and his other states. At least with thesecausal relations as they are for that thinker at that moment; and perhapsalso as they are for that thinker at other times, and for his counterpartswho lived divergent lives, and even for other beings of the same kindas he. For my present purpose, most of the debated differences betweenvarieties of functionalism do not matter; except that of course I requiresome sort of analytic functionalism, not just a contingent connectionbetween contents and roles. If it were a contingent connection, the worldsposited in the paradox might be worlds where that connection does nothold.
If the functional role of the thinker's state determines the content ofhis thought, then there can be only as many different possible contentsof thought as there are different definitive functional roles. The differentfunctional roles are the relevantly different ways of thinking; otherdifferences between thinkers do not distinguish their contents of thought.
(Here, of course, I mean the 'narrowly psychological' contents; but ifthe abundance the paradox requires cannot be found already among thenarrow contents, I do not see how broad contents will serve my opponentbetter.) Maybe it is just possible that the definitive functional roles mightbe infinite in number. But there is infinity and there is infinity. I cannot

More Worlds Than There Are?107see the slightest prima facie reason to think that there are even uncountablymany of the definitive roles, let alone that there are as many as thereare propositions (beth-three, on the lowest reasonable estimate). Theparadox settles that there are not, but that conclusion should come asno surprise.
It's all very well to say that there must be unthinkable contents becausethere aren't enough functional roles to go around; but it would be niceto say what an unthinkable content would be like. Of course I cannotget you to think one, nor can I express one in language that gets its meaningultimately in virtue of the content of our thoughts. (Thus the semanticversion of the paradox fails along with the psychological version.) Still,
I think I can say something about what the omitted contents are, drawingon the sketch of a functionalist theory of content that I offered insection 1.4.
Such a theory, I said, should have two parts. One part says what itis for an assignment of content to states to fit the functional roles of thestates; the constraints are principles of rationality, for instance a principleto the effect that a state which is assigned content consisting of somesystem of beliefs and desires ought to be a state that tends to produceconduct that would serve those desires according to those beliefs. Butprinciples of fit can be expected to underdetermine the assignment ofcontent very badly. Given a fitting assignment, we can scramble it intoan equally fitting but perverse alternative assignment. Therefore a theoryof content needs a second part: as well as principles of fit, we need`principles of humanity', which create a presumption in favour of somesorts of content and against others.
For instance, one fitting assignment might be that I want a pot of beer,
and I think it can be had at the nearest pub. But an equally fittingassignment might be that I suddenly want a saucer of mud, and I expectthe pub to serve me that. Extend the perverse assignment to make it cohere;
part of it must be that I follow a queer sort of inductive 'reason', onwhich all my previous experience of pubs supports my peculiar expectation.
If both those assignments fit equally, then the first is right and the secondis wrong. I don't mean that the first is the more likely hypothesis. RatherI mean that the principles that favour the first are among the principlesconstitutive of content.
If I had behaved differently, would that have made the secondassignment right in virtue of its better fit? No; because ex hypothesi thetwo assignments fit the same behaviour. If I behaved differently, thatwould not favour the second assignment over the first, but rather woulddetract from the fit of both. There is nothing that could favour the secondand make it correct. If the second fits well enough to be in the running,
then so does the first. Then the first wins. There aren't enough functionalroles to go around; the first and second assignments are rival claimants

108Paradox in Paradise?
to the same role; and the first is the more deserving claimant by reasonof the perversity of the second; so that role belongs to the first, and thesecond must go without. So the second assignment, taken as a whole,
affords an example of unthinkable content.
That's a tame example; there are countless fitting assignments thatwould be more perverse still. The contents they assign could not beexpressed finitely; they would require infinitely gruesome gerrymandersof the more or less natural properties that we have words for. They areineligible contents of thought because they are utterly unpatterned andmiscellaneous. I suggest that an unthinkable content is one that can neverbe correctly assigned because, whenever it fits the functional roles of thethinker's states, some more favoured content also fits. If so, you justcannot think a thought with that content. Being smart wouldn't help.
Maybe you are already smart enough to make the unfavoured contentfitting; it still isn't right if some more favoured rival also fits.
2.4 How Can We Know?
Another line of argument is epistemic. I began with our abundant modalknowledge, particular and general. We know that there might be a talkingdonkey; and we know a general principle which tells us, for instance,
that if there might be a talking donkey and there might be a philosophisingcat, then there might be both together side by side. I want to incorporatethis knowedge into a systematic theory. Accordingly, I uphold modalrealism. But thereby - so says the objection - I betray the modal knowledgeI began with. For if modal realism gives the right account of the contentof what we know, then it could not possibly be known at all!
Thus Richards: 'while possible-worlds semantics does yield truth-
conditions for possibility statements . . . the truth-conditions are suchthat, for any given statement, it is impossible in general to determinewhether they are met and hence whether the statement is true. . . . Howshall I determine whether A is true in some world or other? Unless itis true in my world, direct inspection is ruled out' (`The Worlds of DavidLewis', pages 109-10). Lycan concurs, asking how in particular we cantell without inspection whether there is a world where Saul Kripke is theson of Rudolf Carnap.
The objection echoes Benacerraf's famous dilemma for philosophy ofmathematics. It would seem that we have abundant mathematicalknowledge, including knowledge of the existence of countless mathematicalobjects not open to direct inspection. We might very well want to takethe content of this knoweldge at face value; or in Benacerraf's less loadedwords, we might want our account of mathematical truth to be motivatedby 'the concern for having a homogeneous semantical theory in which

How Can We Know?109semantics for the propositions of mathematics parallels the semantics forthe rest of the language'. But 'accounts of truth that treat mathematicaland nonmathematical discourse in relevantly similar ways do so at thecost of leaving it unintelligible how we can have any mathematicalknowledge whatsoever; whereas those which attribute to mathematicalpropositions the kinds of truth conditions we can clearly know to obtain,
do so at the expense of failing to connect these conditions with any analysisof the sentences which shows how the assigned conditions are conditionsof their truth.' The trouble is that knowledge requires some sort of causalconnection between the knower and the subject matter of his knowledge.
But a standard, straightforward account of mathematical truth 'will depicttruth conditions in terms of conditions on objects whose nature, asnormally conceived, places them beyond the reach of the better understoodmeans of human cognition (e.g. sense perception and the like)'
(`Mathematical Truth', pages 661-2 and 667-8).
I think it is very plain which horn of Benacerraf's dilemma to prefer.
To serve epistemology by giving mathematics some devious semanticswould be to reform mathematics. Even if verbal agreement withmathematics as we know it could be secured - and that is doubtful - theplan would be to understand those words in a new and different way.
It's too bad for epistemologists if mathematics in its present form bafflesthem, but it would be hubris to take that as any reason to reformmathematics. Neither should we take that as any reason to dismissmathematics as mere fiction; not even if we go on to praise it as veryuseful fiction, as in Hartry Field's instrumentalism. Our knowledge ofmathematics is ever so much more secure than our knowledge of theepistemology that seeks to cast doubt on mathematics.
So mathematics will do as a precedent: if we are prepared to expand ourexistential beliefs for the sake of theoretical unity, and if thereby we cometo believe the truth, then we attain knowledge. In this way, we can evenattain knowledge like that of the mathematicians: we can know that thereexist countless objects causally isolated from us and unavailable to ourinspection. Causal accounts of knowledge are all very well in their place, butif they are put forward as general theories, then mathematics refutes them.
(In taking mathematics as my precedent for knowledge beyond the reachof our causal acquaintance, I run some risk. What if it turns out thatsomehow, after all, we can interpret mathematics as ontologicallyinnocent, not committed to any special, unobservable mathematicalobjects? And what if we can do this in an entirely acceptable fashion -
that is, without at all reforming the content of mathematics, withoutdismissing any part of it as mere useful fiction, and without imposingany devious semantics that seems remote from our ordinary understandingof the idioms of quantification? I have no idea how this could be done,
but perhaps that is just a failure of imagination on my part. If it could be

110Paradox in Paradise?
done, that would be a great triumph for philosophy of mathematics, andI would join in the celebration. But wouldn't it wreck my precedent forknowledge of the other worlds? - Not altogether. It could not be said thatreally we understood mathematics all along in the wonderfully innocentway. (Else what made it so hard to give any account of our understanding?)
So I still have a conditional judgement to cite as my precedent. Even ifthere does turn out to be some ontologically innocent way to understandmathematics, still we have judged - and judged rightly, say I - that wedid not require any such thing before we could have mathematicalknowledge; we would have had mathematical knowledge even if it hadbeen knoweldge of a causally inaccessible realm of special objects.)
You might grant that we have knowledge of a vast realm ofmathematical objects beyond the reach of our causal acquaintance; nocausal account covers this part of our knowledge. But you might wantto distinguish the mathematical and modal cases: the mathematical objectsare abstract, whereas the other worlds are supposed to be concrete. Andyou might think this distinction has something to do with how thingscan and cannot be known. Thus Skyrms:
If possible worlds are supposed to be the same sorts of things as our actualworld; if they are supposed to exist in as concrete and robust a sense asour own; if they are supposed to be as real as Afghanistan, or the centerof the sun or Cygnus A, then they require the same sort of evidence fortheir existence as other constituents of physical reality. (`Possible Worlds,
Physics and Metaphysics', page 326.)
Presumably he thinks that different rules of evidence would apply if worldswere supposed to exist in some delicate sense, or if they were abstractand not at all like Afghanistan.
If modal knowledge is what I say it is, and if we have the modalknowledge that we think we do, then we have abundant knowledge ofthe existence of concrete individuals not causally related to us in any way.
For instance, we know a priori that besides the donkeys among ourworldmates there are countless other donkeys, spread over countlessworlds. They are other-worldly donkeys, unactualised donkeys, 'merelypossible' donkeys, but donkeys nonetheless. But aren't donkeys just thesort of thing whose existence can only be known a posteriori, by meansof causal acquaintance?
(Maybe causal acquaintance with donkeys themselves is not required -
we need no backward causation to know that there will be donkeys inthe next century - but in that case we are causally acquainted with thepast causes of future donkeys. In the case of other-worldly donkeys,
though, we can no more be acquainted with the donkeymakers than withthe donkeys themselves.)

 How Can We Know?111I don't really know what is meant by someone who says thatmathematical objects are abstract whereas donkeys, even other-worldlyones, are concrete. But in section 1.7 I listed four Ways, by no meansequivalent, in which such a statement might be meant. Way of Example:
donkeys are donkey-like, mathematical objects are number-like. Way ofConflation: donkeys are particular individuals, whereas mathematicalobjects are sets or perhaps universals. Negative Way: donkeys stand inspatiotemporal and causal relations, mathematical objects don't. Wayof Abstraction: mathematical objects are abstractions from somethingor other, donkeys are not. Whichever is meant, I can more or less agree,
except that the last applies to some mathematical objects more clearlythan to others. (I see how a rational number is an abstraction: it is anequivalence class of ratios. But what about an arbitrary set ofmiscellaneous integers?) But I do not see how any of these differentstatements supports the alleged connection between different ways ofknowing and different kinds of entities to be known. The Negative Waydoes at least make a relevant distinction: the entities it calls abstract cannotbe known by causal acquaintance. That gives us no help in understandinghow else they can be known. To say that abstract entities alone are knownwithout benefit of causal acquaintance seems unprincipled: they'd betterbe, or they can't be known at all! Could 'abstract' just mean 'don'tworry'?
I think it is true that causal acquaintance is required for some sortsof knowledge but not for others. However, the department of knowledgethat requires causal acquaintance is not demarcated by its concrete subjectmatter. It is demarcated instead by its contingency. Here, the relevanceis plain. If I know by seeing, for instance, my visual experience dependson the scene before my eyes; if the scene had been different, within limits,
my experience and my subsequent belief would have been correspondinglydifferent. Likewise other channels of causal acquaintance set up patternsof counterfactual dependence whereby we can know what is going onaround us. But nothing can depend counterfactually on non-contingentmatters. For instance nothing can depend counterfactually on whatmathematical objects there are, or on what possibilities there are. Nothingsensible can be said about how our opinions would be different if therewere no number seventeen, or if there were no possibility for dragonsand unicorns to coexist in a single world. All counterfactuals withimpossible antecedents may indeed be vacuously true. But even so, it isseldom sensible to affirm them.
Our knowledge can be divided into two quite different parts. As bestwe can, I think by seeking a theory that will be systematic and devoidof arbitrariness, we arrive at a conception of what there is altogether:
the possible worlds, the possible individuals that are their parts, and themathematical objects, even if those should turn out to be pure sets not

112Paradox in Paradise?
made out of the parts of the worlds. This conception, to the extent thatit is true, comprises our modal and mathematical knowledge. But aconception of the entire space of possibilities leaves it entirely open wherein that space we ourselves are situated. To know that, it is necessary toobserve ourselves and our surroundings. And observation of any sort,
whether sensory or by means of instruments and traces and signals andrecords that can put us into dependence on our more distant surroundings,
is a matter of causal dependence of one contingent matter of fact uponanother. We do not find out by observation what possibilities there are.
(Except that if we notice that logical space as we conceive it contains novery plausible candidates to be ourselves, that might be a good reasonto reconsider our conception.) What we do find out by observation iswhat possibilities we are: which worlds may be ours, which of theirinhabitants may be ourselves.
So we have the desired boundary between knowledge that does andthat doesn't require causal contact with the subject matter. It is a principledboundary, though motivated within the very modal realism that is indispute. (I am mounting a defensive operation, and will be content witha standoff.) Modal and mathematical knowledge together fall on the rightside of the line. Our contingent knowledge that there are donkeys at ourworld requires causal acquaintance with the donkeys, or at least with whatproduces them. Our necessary knowledge that there are donkeys at someworlds - even talking donkeys, donkeys with dragons as worldmates, andwhat have you - does not require causal acquaintance either with thedonkeys or with what produces them. It requires no observation of oursurroundings, because it is no part of our knowledge of which possibleworld is ours and which possible individuals are we.
If you think that all knowledge requires causal acquaintance with thesubject matter, I think that is just hasty generalisation. But if you concedethat knowledge of mathematical objects does not, and yet you insist thatknowledge of other-worldly donkeys does, then I doubt that you reallydo regard the latter as non-contingent modal knowledge. I suspect thatyou suspect that the other worlds must really be parts of actuality, notalternative possibilities. We considered this as an objection in its ownright in section 2.1. It is right or it is wrong. If it is right, it is decisiveas it stands. If it is wrong, it should be rejected altogether. Either way,
it is better to take it straight than to entangle it with issues aboutknowledge. If the other worlds would be just parts of actuality, modalrealism is kaput. If not, then the knowledge we have concerning donkeysat other possible worlds is not on a par with the knowledge we lackconcerning donkeys in remote or hidden parts of this world. We shouldnot be misled by a false analogy between the two. The former is partof our modal knowledge of what worlds there are. The latter would bepart of our knowledge about which world is ours; we gain such knowledge

How Can We Know?113by interacting causally with the world around us, and the problem is thatwe interact mainly with its nearby and unhidden parts.
If we don't know by causal interaction that other worlds and their donkeysexist, how do we know? - I can take that question three ways. (1) I cantake it as a request for an analysis of knowledge; and for a fully generalanalysis, one that applies to the whole range of our knowledge, modaland mathematical knowledge included. That is a fair request, and I regretthat I cannot deliver the goods. But I don't see that this is especially myproblem. It is a problem for everyone (certain sceptics and conventionalistsexcepted) and it is not worsened by a modal realist construal of the contentof our modal knowledge.
(I do have one suggestion to offer. The analysis of knowledge is plaguedwith puzzles about truths believed for bad reasons: because you were toldby a guru, because you made two mistakes that cancelled out, becauseby luck you never encountered the persuasions or evidence that wouldhave misled you, . . . . In each case, the puzzle is introduced by one ortwo examples; but we then suppose that an analysis needs to deal withthe problem across the board. Maybe not. Maybe some of the familiarpuzzles don't arise in connection with knowledge of simple non-contingentmatters. Can you really not know that 2 + 2 = 4, or that there are no truecontradictions, when you fully understand and accept the statement? Idoubt it. Would your acceptance of these statements fail to be knowledgeif you only accepted them because the guru told you to? Or because twoof your mistakes cancelled out? Or because you chanced to miss the lectureby the persuasive sophist who would have changed your mind? Not so,
I think, or not clearly so.)
(2) Or I can take the question how we know as a request for 'naturalisticepistemology'. Never mind what makes our modal opinions count asknowledge; how do we come by the modal opinions that we do in facthold? (`You say the dollar will be devalued tomorrow - how do youknow?' Imagine that the question is asked not by a doubter or anepistemologist, but by an official seeking your help in plugging leaks.
He wants to know how you came to think so.) In the mathematical case,
the answer is that we come by our opinions largely by reasoning fromgeneral principles that we already accept; sometimes in a precise andrigorous way, sometimes in a more informal fashion, as when we rejectarbitrary-seeming limits on the plentitude of the mathematical universe.
I suppose the answer in the modal case is similar. I think our everydaymodal opinions are, in large measure, consequences of a principle ofrecombination - something along the lines discussed in section 1.8, thoughdoubtless there is room to improve my formulation of it. One couldimagine reasoning rigorously from a precise formulation of it, but in factour reasoning is more likely to take the form of imaginative experiments.

114Paradox in Paradise?
We try to think how duplicates of things already accepted as possible -
for instance, because they are actual - might be arranged to fitthe description of an alleged possibility. Having imagined variousarrangements - not in complete detail, of course - we consider how theymight aptly be described. If things of these kinds were arranged like this,
would that be a world where Saul Kripke is the son of Rudolf Carnap?
For more far-fetched possibilities, recombination is less useful. Butthere are other principles that we can apply. A rejection of arbitrary-
seeming limits on the plenitude of worlds, for instance, might lead usto conclude that if any worlds have seventeen dimensions then others haveeighteen; or that it is highly unlikely that every natural propertyinstantiated at any world is instantiated here at our world. On still otherquestions, there seems to be no way at all of fixing our modal opinions,
and we just have to confess our irremediable ignorance. I think onequestion of this kind concerns incompatibility of natural properties. Isit absolutely impossible for one particle to be both positively and negativelycharged? Or are the two properties exclusive only under the contingentlaws of nature that actually obtain? I do not see how we can make upour minds; or what guarantee we have that there must be some way tosettle the question. Certainly we are not entitled just to make the truthbe one way or the other by declaration. Whatever the truth may be, itisn't up to us.
Certainly the way to come by modal opinions is not to inspect the worldsone at a time, not only because we cannot inspect the worlds at all, butbecause we would have to work very fast to run through all of them withina conveniently short time.3 You might as well think that our knowledgeof the real numbers comes from inspecting them one at a time! No; ourmethods must be general, in both the mathematical and the modal cases.
Certainly when we reason from recombination by means by imaginativeexperiments, the method is general; we imagine only some salient features,
and thereby cover an infinite class of worlds all in one act of imagining.
(3) Finally, I can take the question how we know as a sceptical challenge:
put this alleged knowledge on a firm foundation, ,show that it is derivedby an infallible method. My first response would be to say that here, aselsewhere, it is unreasonable to hope for firm foundations or infalliblemethods. But on second thought, it seems that infallible methods canbe had, and with the greatest of ease. Probably the right thing to sayis that the demand for an infallible method does not make very goodsense for knowledge of non-contingent matters, because it is too easilytrivialised. For if it is a necessary truth that so-and-so, then believingthat so-and-so is an infallible method of being right. If what I believe3Richards makes this point; as does McGinn, after making me a handsome gift of afaculty of 'mental vision' which works like the notorious powerful telescope.

 A Road to Scepticism?115is a necessary truth, then there is no possibility of being wrong. That isso whatever the subject matter of the necessary truth, and no matter howit came to be believed. So perhaps an infallible general method is whatis demanded. But that too is suspiciously easy. How about the methodof reasoning from certain specified premises which are themselves non-
contingent? In the modal case, the reasoning might be highly informal,
consisting mainly of imaginative experiments implicitly premised on aprinciple of recombination; in the mathematical case, the reasoning mightproceed more or less rigorously from axioms of iterative set theory, orfrom the axioms of some limited branch of mathematics. Suppose, forexample, that you accept every theorem you can deduce from the Peanoaxioms within a certain deductive system. If in fact the axioms arenecessarily true (as they are), and the deductive system necessarily preservestruth, then you cannot possibly go wrong. You are following a methodof arriving at arithmetical opinions that is both infallible and general.
Never mind that you follow this method only because your guru told youto; it is still infallible and general.
So what is really wanted? Is it that we must put our firm foundationson still firmer foundations, and subsume our general infallible methodsunder still more general infallible methods, ad infinitum? Surely theremust be an end sooner or later, and why not sooner? Is it that we mustbe reasonable? I think the procedure of revising our opinions piecemeal,
guided in part by theoretical conservatism and in part by the pursuit oftheoretical unity, is what we call 'being reasonable'; and it is by thisprocedure that we can accept the Peano axioms, the axioms of iterativeset theory, the principle of recombination, and so forth. Is it that we mustprove that it is reasonable to be reasonable? That proof should be a one-
liner. Is it that we must find something to say that would, of necessity,
make anyone who heard it become reasonable forthwith? That wouldbe a spell, not an argument. Must we prove, from no questionablepremises, that those who are reasonable will never fall into error? Thatis not to be expected.
2.5 A Road to Scepticism?
I now turn to three milder objections. They say not that modal realismleads to outright paradox, but that it somehow demands momentouschanges in the way we think and live. I may in consistency be a modalrealist - but only if I am prepared to change my life in extreme andeccentric ways to suit my philosophy. I am not prepared to do any suchthing, and don't see why I should.

116Paradox in Paradise?
The first of these objections has been raised by Peter Forrest, in `Occam'sRazor and Possible Worlds'; by George Schlesinger; and (in discussion)
by Robert M. Adams and J. J. C. Smart. They say that a modal realistought to be a sceptic; because there are ever so many deceptive worlds,
full of people very like us - counterparts or duplicates of us - who learnfrom experience in exactly the same way that we do, but who learnfalsehoods.
Some of our deceived counterparts expect the future to resemble thepast in the appropriate ways; but they live in worlds where the futuredoes not at all resemble the past. Such worlds exist by recombination:
graft any future onto any past. For some of the deceived, things will gowrong in a subtle and insidious way: new observations will tend to confirmthe ether drift after all. Those are the lucky ones. For others, things willdegenerate into utter chaos all around them. Others will never learn oftheir errors, for one reason or another. They will never be disappointed,
but they will have been no less deceived.
Some are deceived not about the future but about the past: they livein brand-new worlds full of false traces and records of a past that neverwas. There might have been a Falsifier to make the false traces. But thereneedn't have been - for any possible state, there are worlds that beginin just that state.
Some are deceived even about their present. Some wield Occam's razorjust as we do; they favour the most parsimonious theory that fits theirobservations, but unfortunately their worlds are full of epiphenomenalrubbish that does not interact in any way with them or with anythingthey can observe. Some are the playthings of powerful field linguists,
who irradiate their surfaces so as to prompt assent to falsehoods. Someare brains in vats. However reasonably they theorise, their theories arealmost entirely wrong.4Shouldn't the sad fate of all these counterparts and duplicates of oursbe a warning to us? What business have we to trust what we call`reasonable' methods of forming beliefs and expectations, if we knowhow those methods betray so many others so like ourselves? Why shouldwe expect better luck than theirs? A modal realist has no right to trustinduction - he should turn sceptic forthwith.
(I shall use the word 'induction' broadly, to cover all the methods wedeem reasonable for forming beliefs about the unobserved parts of ourworld on the basis of experience with the observed parts. Inductionnarrowly speaking - the extrapolation of frequencies from samples to thepopulations sampled - is, of course, an important part of induction. But4I reject recent arguments that brains in vats would not be deceived. The argumentsonly show how we must take some care in saying what the brains are and are not wrongabout. See my 'Putnam's Paradox'.

A Road to Scepticism?117what I mean in general is a complicated matter of inheriting, devising,
testing, revising, and applying hypotheses; of judging the a prioricredibility of alternative possibilities, and of continually reapportioningour credence among them under the impact of new evidence; donesometimes thoughtfully, more often by habit, sometimes betwixt andbetween.)
I have no intention of becoming a sceptic. What we call 'inductivereason' is rightly so called; and I, as a modal realist, have no more reasonto foresake inductive reason than anyone else has. I do have the reasonthat everyone has; and I agree with common opinion that this reasonis insufficient.
The reason that everyone has is that induction is fallible. It is possible,
and it is possible in very many ways, that by being reasonable we shallbe led into error. By trusting induction we run a risk, and we proceedin the confident hope that the genuine possibilities of error will seldombe realised. All that, I say, is quite independent of any theory of the natureof possibilities. I recognise the possibilities of error that everyone elserecognises; they are no more and no less possibilities of error for beingunderstood as other worlds of a kind with our own. They give me nomore and no less reason to foresake inductive reason than they give tosomeone who holds a rival metaphysical view of their nature, or tosomeone who holds no particular view. Even if someone says there areno such entities as possibilities at all, but still he says it is possible in verymany ways that we might be deceived (I have no idea what he thinks thereare many of!), I think that he and I have equal reason, and equallyinsufficient reason, to distrust induction.
Why should the reason everyone has to distrust induction seem moreformidable when the risk of error is understood my way: as the existenceof other worlds wherein our counterparts are deceived? It should not.
But why does it? I have two conjectures. The first is that we are in anunstable condition. We have not become altogether reconciled to ourpredicament, though we have got in the habit of not fussing about it.
Outside the philosophy room, it is inevitable that we give our trust toa fallible method. But underneath, we really do not like to do such athing. And calling the fallible method 'inductive reason' - as we are rightto do, because that is indeed the name we have given it - does not makeus like it any better. But there are not a lot of things to be said one wayor the other about our disagreeable predicament, we have said those thingsquite often enough, and so we put our attention elsewhere. But if thatis our condition, our discontent is always ready to come alive again ifthe same old thing - namely, that there are abundant possibilities oferror - can be said in a new and different way. And one way to give ita new and different look is to tie it to a controversial account of themetaphysical nature of the possibilities in question. That can make it come

118Paradox in Paradise?
back to haunt us as vigorously as if it were brand new. Modal realismcreates no new reason for scepticism, but it revivifies the old reason.
A different conjecture is that once again we are being influenced bythe thought that everything is actual. That means that if I am right thatthere are other worlds, they are not the alternative possibilities I say theyare; so what they present is not the mere possibility of error. Instead,
the other worlds are more of actuality, and whatever inductive deceptionoccurs therein occurs actually. But if we knew that many people wereactually being deceived, that would not be just the old reason forscepticism: distrust induction because it is fallible. No; that would be agood inductive reason to distrust induction. It's not that we should trustinduction while it teaches us that it is not to be trusted; rather, our attemptto trust it would destroy itself. If a prophet says: 'Buy cheap, sell dear,
and never heed the word of the likes of me!' then however much youmight wish to follow his counsel, there is no way you can. It's not justthat you would find it difficult to take him seriously; the trouble is thatif you follow either part of his counsel you thereby disregard the other part.
I claim once more that I am within my rights to call the other worldspossible, not actual. If so, they give us no cases of actual inductive error,
so they give us no inductive reason to distrust induction. Insofar as thepresent objection relies on setting induction against induction, it is eitherwrong (if I am right) or superfluous (if I am wrong); since if the otherworlds are not alternative possibilities then the present objection is theleast of my troubles.
We might ask how the inductively deceptive worlds compare in abundanceto the undeceptive worlds. If this is meant as a comparison of cardinalities,
it seems clear that the numbers will be equal. For deceptive and undeceptiveworlds alike, it is easy to set a lower bound of beth-two, the number ofdistributions of a two-valued magnitude over a continuum of spacetimepoints; and hard to make a firm case for any higher cardinality. However,
there might be a sense in which one or the other class of worldspredominates even without a difference in cardinality. There is a goodsense, for instance, in which the primes are an infinitesimal minorityamong the natural numbers, even without any difference in cardinality:
their limiting relative frequency is zero. We cannot take a limiting relativefrequency among the worlds, for lack of any salient linear order; butperhaps there is some third way, not cardinality and not relative frequency,
to make sense of the question how abundant are the deceptive worlds.
In `Occam's Razor and Possible Worlds', Peter Forrest arguesingeniously that there is a certain sense in which deceptive worldspredominate, though without a difference in cardinality. If he were right,
a predominance of possibilities of error could support scepticism in away that a mere abundance of such possibilities could not.

 A Road to Scepticism?119He concentrates on only one sort of possibility of error: the world fullof epiphenomenal rubbish, in which we go wrong by relying on Occam'srazor. Consider only worlds with observers like ourselves; by`epiphenomenal', let us mean things that do not interact with thoseobservers or with anything they observe. A clean world is one with nothingepiphenomenal; clean worlds are not deceptive in the way underconsideration, though of course some of them are deceptive in other ways.
All other worlds are rubbishy. If epiphenomenal rubbish is present it canbe here but not there, or there but not here, or . . . . But if it is absentit is nowhere, and that's that. So there are countless ways for it to bepresent, and only one way for it to be absent. This suggests that we canassociate each clean world with infinitely many rubbishy worlds. We can:
let us call worlds equivalent iff they are exactly alike except for whateverepiphenomenal rubbish they may contain. Each clean world is equivalentto infinitely many rubbishy worlds, but not to any clean worlds exceptitself. (Or a world indiscernible from itself. But let me grant to Forrest,
for the sake of the argument, that there are no indiscernible worlds. Ido not know whether this is true, but I do agree with Forrest that anattempt to avoid his conclusion by appeal to indiscernible worlds wouldbe outrageously ad hoc.) The equivalence classes partition the relevantworlds, and in each equivalence class the rubbishy worlds outnumber theclean worlds by infinity to one. In each class, rubbishy worlds predominateand clean worlds are an infinitesimal minority.
Class by class, rubbishy worlds predominate; so, in some reasonablesense, they predominate simpliciter. Call this Forrest's direct argument.
He regards it as intuitively plausible, but lacking in rigour. I regard itas lacking in force altogether, because it can be paralleled to its discredit.
Here is an infinite table in which each number appears once. The left-
hand column is an enumeration of the non-primes; the rest is anenumeration of the primes, folded up to fill a two-dimensional array.
4121113...
6371741...
85193759...
The rows partition the numbers; and in each row, the primes outnumberthe non-primes by infinity to one. Class by class, the primes predominate.
Shall we conclude that the primes predominate simpliciter? - We wouldnot have thought so, accustomed as we are to thinking that (in the senseof limiting frequency) the primes are the infinitesimal minority!
If we really have found a sense in which the primes predominate, wemust acknowledge that in the same sense the non-primes also predominate,
or the squares, or the odds, or the evens, or whatever infinite subclass

120Paradox in Paradise?
of the numbers you please. For in each case we can build a table on thesame principle: the alleged minority squeezes into one column, the allegedmajority is folded to fill the rest of the table.
Forrest seems prepared to grant that even if the rubbishy worldspredominate in some sense, they do not have any greater cardinality. Butif this be granted, then we can fight fire with fire. To be sure, there isForrest's partition of worlds. But if the cardinalities are the same, thenthere must also exist a counter-partition: a different way of dividing therelevant worlds into classes, such that in each class there are infinitelymany clean worlds, and only one rubbishy one! So it is the clean worldsthat predominate class by class, and in that sense predominate simpliciter;
and thereby we argue in support of Occam's razor. It might be harderto describe an equivalence relation that generates a counter-partition thanit was to describe the one that generates Forrest's partition, but whatis the relevance of that?
Forrest backs up his direct argument with a 'more rigorous' indirectargument, in two steps. Again we refer to the equivalence classes, withinwhich worlds are alike except perhaps for their epiphenomenal rubbish.
First step. Suppose, per impossibile, that you knew which equivalenceclass contains the actual world. In that class, whichever it is, rubbishyworlds predominate by infinity to one. So you should then conclude,
with almost perfect certainty, that the actual world is rubbishy.
Second step. But all the classes are on a par. Whatever the correct classshould turn out to be, if you knew it you should conclude that the actualworld is rubbishy. Why wait for information when its content couldmake no difference? You should already conclude that the actual worldis rubbishy.
But this 'more rigorous' argument has no more force than the merely`plausible' version. Like the direct argument before it, the indirectargument can be paralleled to its discredit. We can put a counter-partitionin place of Forrest's original partition, thereby supporting Occam's razor.
Or we can parallel it, as before, in a numerical case. Suppose your taskis to guess whether the mystery number, selected you know not how, isprime. Primes predominate, by infinity to one, in every row of ourprevious table; and all the rows are on a par. If, per impossibile, youknew which row contained the mystery number, you should then concludethat it is almost certainly prime. Why wait? You should already concludethat the mystery number is prime - or non-prime, or square or odd oreven or what you will.
Unlike the direct argument, Forrest's indirect argument is an interestingparadox. In view of the discrediting parallels, it is plain that one step

A Road to Scepticism?121or the other must be wrong, but it is not at all clear which one is at fault.
To fault the first step is, in effect, to endorse extreme inequalities in ourdistribution of initial credence. We might have hoped for at least somevestige of a principle of indifference: equal distribution over the worldsmight be uncalled for, it might not even have any clear meaning in theinfinite case, but at least we shouldn't have one single world outweighingan infinite class! To fault the second step is to give up an infinitary versionof an additivity principle for credence. That also is quite unwelcome. Butthat, it seems, is the choice.
But however Forrest's paradox can best be solved, it is everybody'sproblem. It has nothing to do with modal realism. You cannot refutea thesis just by hooking it up to a paradox with a life of its own.
Forrest thinks the paradox does not have a life of its own: modalrealism enters as one of its premises. He thinks that if the rubbishyworlds somehow predominate among all the relevant worlds (as in thedirect argument), or if they outnumber the clean worlds by infinityto one in a class which ex hypothesi is known to contain the actualworld (as in the first step of the indirect argument), that is not byitself a decisive reason to conclude that the actual world is rubbishy. Itis only a defeasible reason. If it is reasonable to believe a priori thatthe actual world is clean, then the defeasible reason is defeated. Thatis a reasonable thing to believe, says Forrest; but only if you are nota modal realist. You have to think that the actual world is special,
not only in its relation to you, but absolutely. Here I disagree; Ithink it is just as reasonable for a modal realist as for anyone else tobelieve a priori that the actual world is clean. It is true that there aremany reasonable modal realists who believe this and are mistaken becausethey inhabit rubbishy worlds. But nobody ever said that inductive reasonwas guaranteed to succeed.
But we needn't dispute the point; because the discreditable parallelsshow that something else is wrong, apart from what Forrest says aboutthe alleged relevance of modal realism. Suppose he is right that givenmodal realism, there is nothing to defeat the first step of his indirectargument. Then equally there is nothing to defeat the first step of theparallel argument that uses a counter-partition to defend the razor. Weend with two opposite conclusions about what a modal realist ought tobelieve; and that is enough to discredit both arguments. Similarly in thecase of the mystery number, we may suppose if we like that there arecountably many guessers, and each has a personal mystery number selectedespecially for him, and every number is the mystery number for someone.
Your mystery number is in no way special, except in its relation to you.
Then there is nothing to defeat the first step of a Forrest-style argumentthat you should be certain that your mystery number is prime, or thatit is non-prime, or square or odd or even or what you will.

122Paradox in Paradise?
Jonathan Bennett and John Bigelow have suggested, in quite differentconnections,5 that abundance of possibilities might be measured byvariety. There are distances between points in Australia that are fargreater than any distances between points in Sydney (even counting thewestern suburbs) and that has something to do with the fact thatSydney is a comparatively small part of Australia. Likewise, supposewe have a region in the space of all possibilities, and there are far greaterdissimilarity distances between points in the whole space than thereever are between points in the region; that would suggest that insome sense the given region is a comparatively small part of the entirespace. (Of course this is the merest sketch: so far as what I've justsaid goes, for instance, we could be fooled by smallish regions withlong thin tentacles. Improvements are feasible, as Bennett and Bigelowshow.) Here, as the spatial analogy shows, our comparisons of size havenothing to do with comparisons of cardinality. Does this approach giveus a new way to say that rubbishy worlds predominate? Clean worlds canbe dissimilar. But rubbishy worlds can be dissimilar in new and differentways. Are there far greater dissimilarities between rubbishy worldsthan there ever are between clean worlds? If so, would that makeit reasonable to believe that ours is a rubbishy world rather than anequivalent clean world?
I think not. Within limits, I defend the notion of comparative similarity.
Within limits, and given suitably ordinary contextual background, wesurely are prepared to weigh respects of similarity and difference againstone another and say, for instance, that some world where the scratchedmatch lights is more like this world (where the unscratched match doesn'tlight) than is any world where the scratched match fails to light becausethe scratching is done underwater. But I insist on the limits, and I protestagainst an appeal to comparative similarity that goes beyond them. Wehave no settled way to weigh ordinary similarities and differences againstunconsidered similarities and differences having to do with theepiphenomenal rubbish. Why should we? For any ordinary counterfactual,
we may as well say that the closest antecedent worlds are those wherethe rubbish is just as it is here - namely absent, or so we may reasonablybelieve. There's no such trade-off as we had between similarity in respectof lighting and similarity in respect of being dry, wherefore we have hadno occasion to establish terms of trade. There is no fact of the matterabout whether dissimilarities involving the rubbish are greater thandissimilarities between clean worlds - to say such a thing is to pretendthat terms of trade have been settled. Among the nearby worlds, wherecomparative similarity is comparatively determinate, it seems quite a good5Bennett, 'Killing and Letting Die'; Bigelow, 'Possible Worlds Foundations forProbability'.

A Road to Indifference?123idea to measure abundance by variety. But to claim that rubbishy worldspredominate by reason of their variety would be to go too far.
2.6 A Road to Indifference?
Likewise it is argued that modal realism should change the way in whichwe care about what happens. Robert M. Adams puts the point as follows.
He is comparing a thesis of 'absolute actuality', on which the world weare part of is a fundamentally different kind of thing from alternativepossibilities, with my indexical theory of actuality, on which the worldsare all of a kind and to call one world actual is only to say that it is theone we are part of.
We may be moved by the joys and sorrows of a character known to befictitious; but we do not really believe it is bad that evils occur in a nonactualpossible world, or good that joys occur in a nonactual possible world,
though of course it would be bad and good, respectively, for them to beactual. I think that our very strong disapproval of the deliberate actualizingof evils similarly reflects a belief in the absolutely, and not just relatively,
special status of the actual as such. Indeed, if we ask, 'What is wrong withactualizing evils, since they will occur in some other possible world anywayif they don't occur in this one?', I doubt that the indexical theory canprovide an answer which will be completely satisfying ethically. (`Theoriesof Actuality', pages 215-16; Loux, page 195.)
Thus a modal realist should be indifferent to this-worldly evils. Therewould be the same sum total of good and of evil throughout the worlds,
no matter which world is ours. And he needn't bother what he does; therewould be the same sum total no matter how he acted.6There would indeed be the same sum total. (And not just because theamounts of good and evil throughout the worlds will in any case beundefined infinite sums.) If I had acted otherwise, for instance by takingto a life of crime, each and every good or evil that is present somewherein the totality of worlds would still have been present, and none wouldhave been added. It is wrong to think: then this world would have beena little worse, and the rest would have been no different, so the totalityof worlds would have been a little worse. No; if I had turned to crime,
a different world would have been actual. The closest world where my6Similarly, D. C. Williams (in a lecture at the University of Notre Dame in 1974)
complains that my view is 'complete fatalism, because the sum total of being is absolutelynecessary'. What's more, this sum total of being involves a variety of miseries horribleto think of. And it is futile to lead a good life and attempt to eradicate evil - the evil youhave gone to the trouble of preventing just happens off in another world.

124Paradox in Paradise?
counterpart turns to crime is one where a different world is actual. Ifthis is world W and it is world V, then this is a world where W is actual,
whereas the closest world where my counterpart turns to crime is a worldwhere V is actual. But it is true at both worlds that both worlds, withall their goods and evils, are part of the totality of worlds.?
Perhaps the confusion is caused by a de re counterfactual: this worldis such that if I had turned to crime, it would have been worse. I interpretthat as follows: the closest world where my counterpart turns to crimeis one where this world's counterpart is worse than this world is. Thecounterpart of W at V presumably is V itself, which presumably is worsethan W, making the de re counterfactual true. Or perhaps the confusionis caused by our old enemy, the thought that really the other worlds arejust parts of actuality, so counterfactuals ought to be about different waysthe totality of worlds might have been. I say again: that's right or wrong,
if right needn't be brought against me in a roundabout fashion, if wrongshouldn't be brought against me at all.
The point comes in a prudential as well as a moral version. Consider onlythe goods that I myself want, apart from whatever moral concerns I mayhave. I have various more or less personal aspirations. At the moment,
I want very much to get this book done. And I hope that afterward itwill meet with some approval; not necessarily that it will win convertsto modal realism, but at least that other people will come to share myunderstanding of what they stand to gain and lose by declining theconversion. This hope moves me to labour day and night in front of anugly green screen. Why bother? For if I am right on this matter, I knowthat there are ever so many worlds where the book gets written, ever somany more where it doesn't, still more where it does but is full of vileerrors, . . . . The book I want to have written will be written in any case —
of necessity, it will be written countless times over, word for word the same.
(And countless more times over, with more or less significant variations.)
Among my counterparts and myself are many who succeed in writingit, and many who fail. What does it matter where I myself fall?
A story by Larry Niven even suggests that knowledge of a pluralityof worlds might reasonably undermine the will to live. Every decisionyou ever make is made in all the myriad ways it might be made. It ismade one way by you, other ways by your other-worldly counterpartswho are exactly like you up to the moment of the decision. Not onlydifficult and momentous decisions will be made all different ways; butalso easy decisions, even decisions too easy to take any thought, like thedecision whether to kill yourself on the spur of the moment for no reason'Here is a case, exceptional but not problematic, where something foreign to a worlditself can sensibly be said to be true at that world. As I said in section 1.2, a restrictingmodifier 'in Australia' or 'at world W' imposes its restriction only defeasibly.

A Road to Indifference?125at all. Given that the decision will in any case be made all different ways,
what does it matter whether you are one of the ones who makes it oneway or one of the ones who makes it another way?
(Three qualifications. (1) Niven's story is not strictly a story of manypossible worlds, but of many world-like parts of one big world; for heposits travel between them. (See section 1.6.) (2) Niven may be talkingabout branching worlds, in which one present decider has many futuresthat are all equally his. If so, I grant his point. That really would makenonsense of decision. (See section 4.2.) But let me assume instead thathe is talking about the case of many different deciders, each with his ownsingle future, who are exactly alike up to the moment of decision. (3)
Part of Niven's argument may be the sceptical point of the previoussection; not only will things come about in all the myriad ways no matterwhat you choose to do, but also you are not entitled to have anyexpectations about consequences to you.)
I reply that the argument for indifference relies on a false premise. Itis so in all three cases, moral and prudential alike, but most obviouslyso in the third case. Wanting to live is not wanting that a kind of thinghappen, somewhere in the worlds and never mind where; it is an egocentric-
want, a want that I myself should have a certain property. The appropriateway to give the content of my desire is not by a condition that I wantthe entire system of worlds to satisfy, but by a condition that I want myselfto satisfy. It is futile to want the entire system of worlds to satisfy acondition, because it is not contingent what conditions the entire systemof worlds does or doesn't satisfy. You might as well want the numberseventeen to be prime, or to be even - satisfied or unsatisfiable, your wishis equally idle either way. It is not idle to want continued life for yourself;
you may have it or not, and you will not get what you want if you makethe wrong decision about whether to kill yourself on the spur of themoment. It will not matter to reality as a whole how you decide - therewill in any case be many just like you who decide one way and manywho decide the other - but it still matters to you. An egocentric want isprima facie a different thing from a want as to how the world shouldbe. Elsewhere I have argued that the prima facie difference is genuine.
The first sort of want is not in general reducible to the second. (In theterminology of my 'Attitudes De Dicto and De Se', some wants areirreducibly de se.) All the more is an egocentric want a different thingfrom a want about how the entire plurality of worlds should be.
We do have irreducibly egocentric wants. There is no difficulty inunderstanding how that is possible; or if there is, it only arises when westubbornly insist that seemingly egocentric wants cannot be what theyseem. Nor can I think of any good reason why we ought not to have them.
Your egocentric desire to survive cannot be satisfied vicariously by the

126Paradox in Paradise?
survival of your counterparts, and that is why you should not be indifferentto whether you live or die.
Likewise, I do not just idly want someone in some world to have writtenthis book I have in mind; I want to have written it myself, and that iswhat motivates me to keep going. And I do not just idly want someoneat some world to be wiser through learning its lessons; I want to changethe thinking of my worldmates. That is doubly egocentric: I want myworldmates to be among the people who learn, and I want to be the oneto teach them. That is why it matters to me whether I am one of thoseamong my counterparts who labour on, or one of those who quit.8In the moral case, I do say that an other-worldly evil is just as muchan evil as a this-worldly one, and an other-worldly good is just as mucha good. If it is a matter simply of judgement, parity of reasoning mustprevail. The Hitler-counterpart of a world that differs from ours mainlywith respect to affairs on the fourth planet of Vega is morally on a parwith the Hitler we know and hate. If to believe it is bad that evils occurin a non-actual possible world is to believe that those evils are bad, or,
in other worlds, that those bad things are evils, of course I believe it;
and in the same way, of course I believe it is good that joys occur in anon-actual possible world.
But, judgements aside, do I really care about other-worldly goods andevils? Is it a matter of wants: should I want there to be less evil and moregood in total, throughout the worlds? It would be an idle wish, since thecharacter of the totality of all the worlds is not a contingent matter. Isee no reason why I ought to have so utterly idle and pointless a wish.
But what is more, I have no idea whether or not I do have it. It is sodisconnected from any guidance of conduct that I cannot tell how it wouldbe manifest in my thought or action whether I had it or not. Perhaps'Mark Johnston has questioned whether I am in a position to insist that my desiresfor the future are egocentric, given the theory I hold of persistence through time. I thinkthat persisting things such as myself are divisible into temporal parts, or stages; and thestage who now wants the book finished is not the stage who will finish it for me. Thendon't I really just want it to get finished somehow, never mind by whom? Wouldn't itbe just as well if a benign impostor took over, if he'd do the job the way I want it done?
And if we agree thus far, why does it matter if the benign impostor, and those he teaches,
are part of some other world?
In reply, I agree that my view makes it fair to think of the desires as belonging in thefirst instance to my present stage, and derivatively to the persisting sum of many stages.
And I agree that what my present stage wants is not to finish the book itself - it's a sensiblestage, so it knows that can't be expected. But that's not to say that it only cares whathappens, never mind how. There is a middle ground. My present stage wants the bookto be finished in the fulfilment of its present intentions - there's the egocentric part - andthat will happen only if the proper sort of causal continuity binds together my presentstage with the one that finishes the book. The continuity thus desired is part of the continuitythat unifies mereological sums of person-stages into persisting people.

A Road to Indifference?127it would be no different from my cool judgement that the evils and goodsof other worlds are no less evils and goods - and if it is that, then I dohave it. Perhaps it would manifest itself in efforts to do the impossibleand improve the affairs of other worlds. If so, I do not have it. Or Isuppose not - but I have no real idea what efforts to do such impossiblefeats would look like, so for all I know, I might be attempting them daily.
Perhaps it would manifest itself in idle thought: should I lie awake atnight bemoaning the evils of other worlds, and should I celebrate theirjoys? I see no reason why I should bemoan the evils and celebrate thejoys even of remote parts of this world, which I believe in along witheveryone else. I suppose the cancer patients in the tenth century sufferedas much as cancer patients do today - ought I to spend time bemoaningtheir suffering?
`Concern' and 'caring' are muddled conglomerates of judgement,
preference, conduct, and attention. To the question whether a modal realistought to be concerned about the joys and sufferings and evils and goodsthat go on in other worlds, I answer in four parts. As to judgement, yes;
not to judge them as what they are would be mistaken. As to preference,
no; a preference that non-contingent things be otherwise is idle. As toconduct, the question is empty; when no possible conduct would berelevant, there is no sense asking whether the relevant things ought tobe done. As to attention, no; there are better ways to spend your lifethan in brooding about the fortunes of perfect strangers, even perfectstrangers who are counterparts of yourself or those you love.
`What is wrong with actualising evils, since they will occur in someother possible world anyway if they don't occur in this one?' - If youactualise evils, you will be an evil-doer, a causal source of evil. That issomething which, if you are virtuous, you do not want to be. Other-
worldly evils are neither here nor there. They aren't your evils. Yourvirtuous desire to do good and not evil has nothing to do with the sumtotal of good and evil throughout reality. It has to do with what befallsyou and your worldmates, and in particular it has to do with the wayin which what befalls yourself and others depends causally on what you do.
For those of us who think of morality in terms of virtue and honour,
desert and respect and esteem, loyalties and affections and solidarity, theother-worldly evils should not seem even momentarily relevant to morality.
Of course our moral aims are egocentric. And likewise all the more forthose who think of morality in terms of rules, rights, and duties; or asobedience to the will of God.
If modal realism makes a problem for anyone, it is for utilitarians.
But not even for commonplace utilitarians, who might go in for a certainamount of generalised benevolence under the heading of solidarity withhumanity, or out of kindness to those whom they are in a position to help.
The problem belongs only to utilitarians of an especially pure sort. Only

128Paradox in Paradise?
if morality consists of maximising the total of good, absolutely regardlessof where and to whom the good may accrue, can it lose its point becausethe sum total of good throughout the plurality of worlds is non-
contingently fixed and depends not at all on what we do. I agree withJ. J. C. Smart's statement of the point:
In fact on a realistic theory of possible worlds they are all going to existanyway, and so a truly universalistic ethics collapses . . . . The only sortof ethics that a realistic theory of possible worlds would allow would bean ethics of the speaker's own world, and this would be a particularistethics, much as an ethics that considered only the good of one's own tribeor nation would be. (Ethics, Persusasion and Truth, pages 88-9.)
But if modal realism subverts only a 'truly universalistic ethics', I cannotsee that as a damaging objection. What collapses is a philosophers'invention, no less remote from common sense than modal realism itself.
An ethics of our own world is quite universalistic enough. Indeed, I daresay that it is already far too universalistic; it is a betrayal of our particularaffections. If my modal realism has any bearing at all on matters of valueand morality, it pushes me toward common sense, not away.
2.7 Arbitrariness Lost?
Peter Unger has argued that modal realism permits us to see the worldas far less arbitrary than we are accustomed to suppose.9 It is not clearthat this would be an objection - Unger regards it rather as a point inmodal realism's favour - but at any rate it is convenient to group it withother arguments that, for better or worse, modal realism should changeour thinking about this-worldly matters. I myself, being conservativelyinclined, do take it as an objection. The fewer remarkable implications,
the better for plausibility. There may indeed be a sense in which modalrealism makes us more comfortable with the arbitrary, brute facts of theworld - no harm in that - but I insist that they remain arbitrary and theyremain unexplained.
Suppose some chance process goes on - a genuine chance process, nota deterministic process in which the predetermining conditions are beyondour ability to observe - and it gives one outcome rather than another.
Or suppose that according to the prevailing laws of nature, particles ofa certain kind cannot in any way be created or destroyed; there are finitelymany of them; and we have one number rather than another of these"Minimizing Arbitrariness'; see also Schlesinger, 'Possible Worlds and the Mystery ofExistence'.

Arbitrariness Lost?129particles. Or suppose that a certain (dimensionless) physical constantfigures in the laws of nature; and it has one value rather than another.
For that matter, suppose the fundamental laws of nature can be codifiedin a system of equations, and these equations take one form rather thananother.
All these seem arbitrary, 'quirky' facts about the world. In each case,
we have a range of alternatives and the world selects one alternative outof the range. It is contingent that one alternative is selected rather thananother. There is no sufficient reason why it happened that way. In thebest possible organisation of the whole truth about the world into adeductive system, such a fact would have to come in as an axiom, nota theorem. It seems to cry out for explanation when there is no explanationto be had. It will distress a rationalist to hear such cries go unanswered;
whereas to someone like me, inured to brute contingency, it seems onlyto be expected. In fact it would arouse my suspicion to be told that, afterall, explanation does not inevitably terminate in brute matters of fact.
Under modal realism, these arbitrary features simply distinguish ourworld from others. Different worlds have all different outcomes of thechance process; all different numbers of the conserved particles; alldifferent values of the physical constant; all different forms of equationsfor the fundamental laws. The entire system of worlds, in which all thedifferent alternatives in each range are chosen, different ones at differentworlds, does not display the arbitrariness of the' worlds consideredindividually. As Unger puts it, 'by localizing our specificity, we minimizethe arbitrariness that is associated with it' (`Minimizing Arbitrariness',
page 31). The same would have been true if all different alternatives hadappeared in different parts of one big world. That opportunity to minimisearbitrariness by localising specificity within our world is not to be had,
so far as we know. But by localising specificity within the entire systemof worlds, we gain the same effect: the arbitrariness seems to vanish.
You might protest: 'it does not vanish, it is only relocated. Differentworlds select different alternatives in each range, so the entire system ofworlds displays no arbitrariness. But then one only of all these worldsis actualised, and it is arbitrary which one that is. And this one arbitraryselection out of a range vaster than ever subsumes all the arbitrarinessthat we saw before.' But if modal realism is true, there is no special thingthat happens to an arbitrary one out of all the worlds; rather, each worldalike is actual from the standpoint of its own inhabitants.
But then isn't it an arbitrary matter which world is ours? - It seemsnot. We just are the inhabitants of one world rather than another. Wehave counterparts whereby we vicariously inhabit other worlds, and inthat sense we could have inhabited other worlds; but there is no otherworld of which we ourselves, literally, are part. Here are we; there areother people elsewhere in space, elsewhere in time, elsewhere among the

130Paradox in Paradise?
worlds. To call it arbitrary that we are of this world rather than anotheris like calling it arbitrary that we are who we are, rather than any of thoseother people who live elsewhere.
It is as if I were to call it arbitrary, for instance, that I am David Lewisrather than being Peter Unger. Is that arbitrary? It is a selection of justone alternative out of a range, sure enough. And I would say that it isin a sense contingent: just as other worlds are alternative possibilities fora world, so other individuals are alternative possibilities for an individual;
and in particular, Unger is an alternative possibility for me. This is sodespite the fact that he is my worldmate, not a part of some other world.
(See sections 1.2 and 4.4, and my ',Individuation by Acquaintance andby Stipulation'.) But it is not a fact about the world that I am DavidLewis rather than being Peter Unger. A fortiori it is not a fact that criesout for explanation. If it is a fact at all, it is an egocentric fact aboutme, not at all a fact about the world. We have no notion of what it couldpossibly mean to explain an egocentric fact like this one. So, very sensibly,
we do not crave any such explanation.
(If you suggest that this fact might indeed be explained in terms ofthe causes that associated my soul with one body rather than another,
you misunderstand the problem. If indeed we were embodied souls, thequestion would not be one about how a certain soul came to inhabit acertain body and lead a certain life. Rather, the egocentric fact wouldbe that I am one soul rather than another - and again, for the supposedsouls just as for ordinary people, we have no notion of what it couldpossibly mean to explain a fact like that.)
Likewise for the fact of which world is ours. It is an egocentric fact,
on a par with the fact of which person is me - in fact, the latter subsumesthe former. Since this egocentric fact cannot have an explanation, neithercan it cry out for one.
So we have, first, the non-contingent fact that there are a plurality ofworlds, wherein the alternatives are selected all different ways. There isnothing arbitrary there, and nothing that cries out for explanation. (Atleast, not if there exists some sufficiently natural break to serve as a limiton the possible sizes and shapes of spacetime; see section 2.2.) And wehave, second, the egocentric fact that we are these people who live inthis world, rather than other people who live in other worlds. Maybe thatis in some sense arbitrary, but it also does not cry out for explanation.
But take the .two together, and they yield the arbitrary facts about thisworld that caught our attention: the outcome of the chance process, thenumber of the conserved particles, the value of the physical constant,
the form of equations for the fundamental laws. So where has thearbitrariness gone?
Nowhere. It remains where it always was. In whatever sense those factswere arbitrary before we embedded them in a modal realist ontology,

Arbitrariness Lost?131they are arbitrary still. It remains true that they involve selection of onealternative out of a large range. It remains true that they are contingent,
which we now take to mean that they vary from world to world. It remainstrue that they are the sort of facts that it would make sense to explain,
and that we would like to explain if we could. And it remains true thatwe cannot explain them. Their derivability from a non-contingent facttogether with an egocentric fact, neither of which cries out for explanation,
does not stop them from crying out for explanation.
Why should it even seem to? Perhaps because explanation is seen toomuch in terms of sufficient reasons, not in terms of information abouthow things are caused. According to modal realism, the non-contingentfact and the egocentric fact give us what is in some sense a sufficient reasonfor every contingent fact about our world. But that sufficient reason,
if we may call it so, is no substitute for the information about causesthat we call 'explanation'. (See my 'Causal Explanation'.) Sometimes weseek information about causes, and we find what we seek. If we learnhow hurricanes are caused, we gain some knowledge of the causal waysof our world. No such knowledge could have been gained just by thinkingthat some worlds have hurricanes and some do not, and that we are whowe are, and we are inhabitants of a world with hurricanes. Sometimeswe seek information about causes, and we are disappointed to learn thatthe only information to be had is negative. We learn that nothing at alldistinguishes the actual causal history of the actual outcome of a chanceprocess from the hypothetical causal history of a hypothetical alternativeoutcome, in other words nothing causes the one thing to happen ratherthan the other. Then what we wanted is not to be had at all; and it isnot to be had by thinking that some worlds have one outcome and somehave the other, and that we are who we are, and we are inhabitants ofa world with this outcome rather than that. Or we learn that the numberof the conserved particles has no cause except, of course, for the numberof the particles at earlier times. Again, nothing that modal realism hasto offer can take the place of the kind of interesting causal informationthat we sought but did not find.
Sometimes the pursuit of explanation is more the pursuit ofunified and general fundamental laws than of information about thecausal histories of events. We may hope to explain the value of thearbitrary-seeming physical constant, or to explain the form of theequations, by deriving the most fundamental laws we know fromstill more fundamental laws that we may hope to discover. We mayhope; but we have no guarantee of success. It might be that the mostfundamental laws we know are the most fundamental laws there are. Whatis sought is information about the nomological ways of our world. Oncemore, nothing that modal realism has to offer can take the placeof that.

132Paradox in Paradise?
If arbitary-seeming facts cry out for explanation and no explanationis forthcoming, modal realism may somehow provide solace and removeour stubborn conviction that there must be some further explanation,
if only we could find it. If so that is all to the good, since that convictionwas unreasonable in the first place. But what modal realism cannot dois to provide an explanation of its own, suited to take the place of themissing this-worldly explanation.
The same can be said when the facts about our world seem not so mucharbitrary as remarkably lucky. A case can be made that the evolutionof life is possible only if the values of the fundamental physical constantsand the boundary conditions on the cosmos are exactly right - and lo,
they are exactly right! 10 Merely arbitrary facts may cry out forexplanation, but this remarkable luck cries much more loudly. There areexplanations in terms of divine creation or natural teleology to beproposed, of course - and to be resisted as obscurum per obscurius. Butif these are to be resisted, what can take their place?
A modal realist can appeal to the `anthropic principle': we ought tofind it not at all remarkable that the physical constants and boundaryconditions turn out to permit the evolution of intelligent life, no matterhow exceptional the required values may be. For there are many worlds,
with all different values of the constants and boundary conditions.
Intelligent life is found only at those of the worlds where the constantsand conditions permit it, or where other-worldly laws make it less sensitiveto the constants and the conditions. Of course, any inhabitant of a worldwill find that his world is a habitable one. That is only to be expected.
It does not cry out for further explanation.
(You don't have to be a modal realist to appeal to the anthropicprinciple. You don't need genuine other worlds, suitably isolated, asopposed to world-like parts of this world. You don't need worlds, orworld-like parts, that are all the ways they could possibly be; you onlyneed enough variety to make it unremarkable that habitats for intelligentlife are included. Sciama speaks of an 'extreme form' of the anthropicprinciple which answers the question why we are here by 'invoking theexistence of all conceivable logically self-consistent universes' (`Issues inCosmology', page 395). It is this extreme form that modal realism offers.
However I cannot advance this as much of a selling point for modalrealism, since more moderate forms might do to meet whatever need thereis for an anthropic principle in cosmology.)
It's all very well to invoke the anthropic principle when the remarkablehabitability of our world seems to cry out for explanation. But I do notthink that this invoking of the anthropic principle is itself an explanation.
Rather it is a reason why we may be content, if need be, to do without'°See inter alia Gale, Leslie, and Sciama.

The Incredulous Stare133one. It is not an explanation because it gives no information about thecausal or nomological ways of our world. It tells us nothing about howany event was caused; it does nothing to subsume laws under still moreunified and general laws.
It may be said that an anthropic 'explanation' deserves that namebecause it makes its explanandum less surprising. That it does, to be sure.
But that is not what explanations do, or at any rate not always. Explana-
tions give causal or nomological information. That information often doesmake the explanandum less surprising, but it may make it more surprising,
or may leave it about as surprising as before. Suppose you check intoa hotel room, and there you find a new-looking pack of cards. They turnout to be ordered neatly: they go from ace to king of clubs, then ace toking of diamonds, then ace to king of hearts, then ace to king of spades.
Not surprising - maybe it's a brand new deck, or maybe whoever left themhad won at solitaire. Not so. What's true is that they got into that orderby being well and fairly shuffled. The explanation, if known, would makethe explanandum much more surprising than it was before.
2.8 The Incredulous StareI once complained that my modal realism met with many incredulousstares, but few argued objections. (Counterfactuals, page 86.) Thearguments were soon forthcoming. We have considered several of them.
I think they have been adequately countered. They lead at worst tostandoffs. The incredulous stares remain. They remain unanswerable.
But they remain inconclusive.
Modal realism does disagree, to an extreme extent, with firm commonsense opinion about what there is. (Or, in the case of some among theincredulous, it disagrees rather with firmly held agnosticism about whatthere is.) When modal realism tells you - as it does - that there areuncountable infinities of donkeys and protons and puddles and stars, andof planets very like Earth, and of cities very like Melbourne, and of peoplevery like yourself, . . . small wonder if you are reluctant to believe it.
And if entry into philosophers' paradise requires that you do believe it,
small wonder if you find the price too high.
I might ask, of course, just what common sense opinion it is with whichmy modal realism disagrees. Is it the opinion that there do not actuallyexist an uncountable infinity of donkeys? I don't disagree at all with that -
to actually exist is to be part of this world, and I dare say that there areonly finitely many donkeys among our worldmates. Or is it, simply, theopinion that there do not exist an uncountable infinity of donkeys - withthe quantifier wide open, entirely unrestricted, and no 'actually' eitherexplicit or tacit in the sentence? That opinion I do indeed deny. But if

134Paradox in Paradise?
you ask a spokesman for common sense, out of the blue, which opinionit is that he holds, doubtless he will say that he cannot tell the differencebetween the two. He thinks actuality is all there is; I disagree. (We haveconsidered this question in section 2.1.) I make a distinction where hemakes none. Then who is to say whether his undifferentiated opinionis the one I accept or the one I reject? If it is the former, no worries.
Unfortunately, I think it is both. If he doesn't distinguish the twoopinions, he holds both or neither; he certainly doesn't hold neither; sohe holds both. So I do have a severe disagreement with him. It is truethat I also agree with him, and that he himself cannot distinguish thepoint of agreement from the point of disagreement. But I can. To theextent that I respect common sense, that's trouble. And I do respectcommon sense, within limits.
In trying to improve the unity and economy of our total theory byproviding resources that will afford analyses, for instance of modalityas quantification over worlds, I am trying to accomplish two things thatsomewhat conflict. I am trying to improve that theory, that is to changeit. But I am trying to improve that theory, that is to leave it recognisablythe same theory we had before. For it is pointless to build a theory,
however nicely systematised it might be, that it would be unreasonableto believe. And a theory cannot earn credence just by its unity andeconomy. What credence it cannot earn, it must inherit. It is far beyondour power to weave a brand new fabric of adequate theory ex nihilo,
so we must perforce conserve the one we've got. A worthwhile theorymust be credible, and a credible theory must be conservative. It cannotgain, and it cannot deserve, credence if it disagrees with too much ofwhat we thought before. And much of what we thought before was justcommon sense. Common sense is a settled body of theory - unsystematicfolk theory - which at any rate we do believe; and I presume that we arereasonable to believe it. (Most of it.)
Common sense has no absolute authority in philosophy. It's not thatthe folk know in their blood what the highfalutin' philosophers may forget.
And it's not that common sense speaks with the voice of some infalliblefaculty of 'intuition'. It's just that theoretical conservatism is the onlysensible policy for theorists of limited powers, who are duly modest aboutwhat they could accomplish after a fresh start. Part of this conservatismis reluctance to accept theories that fly in the face of common sense. Butit's a matter of balance and judgement. Some common sense opinionsare firmer than others, so the cost of denying common sense opiniondiffers from one case to the next. And the costs must be set against thegains. Sometimes common sense may properly be corrected, when theearned credence that is gained by making theory more systematic morethan makes up for the inherited credence that is lost. It is not to bedemanded that a philosophical theory should agree with anything that

The Incredulous Stare135the man on the street would insist on offhand, uninformed and thereforeuninfluenced by any theoretical gains to be had by changing his mind.
(Especially not if, like many men on the streets nowadays, he would riseto the occasion and wax wildly philosophical at the slightest provocation.)
The proper test, I suggest, is a simple maxim of honesty: never put forwarda philosophical theory that you yourself cannot believe in your leastphilosophical and most commonsensical moments.
The incredulous stare is a gesture meant to say that modal realism failsthe test. That is a matter of judgement and, with respect, I disagree. Iacknowledge that my denial of common sense opinion is severe, and Ithink it is entirely right and proper to count that as a serious cost. Howserious is serious enough to be decisive? - That is our central question,
yet I don't see how anything can be said about it. I still think the priceis right, high as it is. Modal realism ought to be accepted as true. Thetheoretical benefits are worth it.
Provided, of course, that they cannot be had for less.

3Paradise on the Cheap?
3.1 The Ersatzist ProgrammeAnd so the quest for paradise on the cheap. There is a popular andformidable alternative to my own view, ersatz modal realism,' thatpromises us just that. The ersatzers say that instead of an incredibleplurality of concrete worlds, we can have one world only, and countlessabstract entities representing ways that this world might have been.
Likewise we can have abstract entities representing ways that donkeysor whatnot might have been. We need not disagree extravagantly withcommon sense about how many worlds, donkeys, atoms, or gods thereare. The abstract representations are not worlds, donkeys, atoms, or gods.
So there is no affront to common sense ideas about what there is.
According to ersatzism, we have a well-understood division of all thereis into the concrete and the abstract. On the concrete side, common senseopinion about what there is must be respected. There is one concrete world,
and one only. It includes all the concrete beings there are. There are noother worlds, and no other-worldly possible individuals - not, at any rate,
if those are understood as concrete (or partly concrete) entities. Further,
the one concrete world is not any more extensive, and not any less ofa spatiotemporal unity, than common sense opinion supposes it to be.
(Or if it is, that is another story - an unlikely story! - and irrelevant tomodality. The ersatzer certainly will not accept heterodox views aboutthe extent of concrete reality, but he may prefer agnosticism to rejection.)
I too might be heard to say that there is only one world, that thereare only finitely many donkeys, or that there is no God. But when I saysuch things, I am restricting my quantifiers, just as when I look in the'Or 'moderate' modal realism, as Stalnaker calls it - but in what dimension does itsmoderation lie?
136

The Ersatzist Programme137fridge and say that there is no beer. I do not deny that there is beer outsidethe fridge, but I ignore it in my speech. Likewise I may ignore the otherworlds, and the other-worldly donkeys and gods, without at all denyingthat - speaking unrestrictedly - they do exist. Not so for the ersatz modalrealist. When he says that there are no other worlds, and no other-worldlypossible individuals, he says it with his quantifiers wide open. He meansto quantify over everything, without any restriction whatever, ignoringnothing. (And these quantifiers too are meant to be entirely unrestricted.
I doubt that any perfect disambiguation is possible: all our idioms ofquantification alike are flexible, subject to tacit restriction. But I thinkthat, wilful misunderstanding aside, my meaning should be clear.)
If we stand firmly with common sense opinion, it seems that the concreterealm affords no room for a paradise of possibilia. But perhaps theabstract realm will prove more accommodating. There, it seems, we havelicense to believe in what we please. Scarcely anyone protests when themathematicians believe in a vast hierarchy of pure sets, beside which ourcosmos is scarcely better than finite. So why should not metaphysiciansmake us free, provided we say as the mathematicians do: no worries,
it's all abstract! (And if asked what that means, say: you know, abstractthe way mathematical entities are abstract.) Maybe we can get by withthe mathematical entities themselves; or maybe we need other abstractentities. But either way, we can rely on common sense opinion not tostand in the way of the needs of systematic theory. For common senseis opinionated mostly about what there is in the concrete realm.
What does the abstract realm have to offer? According to ersatz modalrealism, there are abstract surrogates fit to play the same theoretical rolesas the concrete possibilia that are to be rejected. These are abstract entitiescapable, somehow, of representing concrete entities. They representin a double sense. (1) They are representations, so that it somehowmakes sense to speak of what is the case according to them; andthereby (2) they are representatives, taking the place of what they purportto represent.
Some of them are the ersatz worlds. These represent the entire concreteworld in complete detail, as it is or as it might have been. One ersatzworld is actualised: it represents the concrete world correctly. The restare unactualised. Any one of them could have been the one to representthe concrete world correctly; it would have been, if the concrete worldhad been suitably different. But as is, there is nothing they representcorrectly. They misrepresent the concrete world as it is. They could haverepresented other concrete worlds correctly, but ex hypothesi there arenone of those to represent.
Not only the entire concrete world, but lesser concrete individuals aswell, have abstract representations: these are the actualised ersatzindividuals. In addition there are unactualised ersatz individuals: these

138Paradise on the Cheap?
might have represented concrete individuals had things been different,
but as is they represent nothing.
Unactualised ersatz worlds and individuals differ from actualised onesonly by their failure to represent anything correctly. They exist just asmuch, and they belong just as much to the one and only world. So theersatzer can happily call all of them actual, and call himself an actualist;
and this is not the merely terminological actualism that I challenged insection 2.1. (He may or may not think it a trivial analytic truth thateverything is actual - that is a separate question.) But if he does call allof them actual, he must take care to distinguish that from actualisation -
for out of all the ersatz worlds and individuals there actually are, all butone of the worlds and the great majority of the individuals areunactualised.
How different this is from my own usage: I say that the other worldsand other-worldly individuals are neither actual nor actualised, and Ianalyse both 'actual' and 'actualised' as indexical terms meaning 'this-
worldly'. And for me, unactualised other-worldly things may indeed besaid not to exist - but only when we speak with our quantifiers restricted.
I do not distinguish actuality from actualisation; and I insist that it isa relative matter,•and that absolute actuality is open to decisive objections.
(See section 1.9).
As I have my relative actuality, so the ersatzer has relative actualisation:
every ersatz world is actualised according to itself and no ersatz worldis actualised according to any other ersatz world. For just as unactualisedersatz worlds misrepresent the truth on other matters, so they - implicitlyif not explicitly - misrepresent the truth about which one of them it isthat represents correctly. Each ersatz world E represents the concrete worldto be a certain way such that, if it were that way, then E would be theersatz world that represents correctly; and thereby E implicitly representsitself as actualised. So far as relative actualisation is concerned, all theersatz worlds are on an equal footing: just as, for me, all the worlds areon an equal footing in that each is actual relative to itself and none isactual relative to any other.
But the ersatzer has not only relative actualisation but absoluteactualisation besides, so his ersatz worlds are not on an equal footingafter all. The one that represents the concrete world correctly isn't justactualised according to itself - it is actualised simpliciter. Every ersatzworld claims to be uniquely accurate - this one really is. I might say thatthe accuracy of ersatz worlds is still relative, since one of them accuratelyrepresents one concrete world, and another another. Not so for theersatzer, because he says there is only the one concrete world to berepresented.
If absolute actuality is open to serious objection, as I said, how doesthe ersatzer get away with it? By not really accepting a plurality of worlds

The Ersatzist Programme139in the first place. I asked how we could know it if the world we are partof is the one that is absolutely actual - after all, if there's a special statusto be had, plenty of other-worldly people have as much reason as we doto think their worlds are the special ones. The ersatzer replies thus.
Everything is actual. No problem there. Only one ersatz world isabsolutely actualised. We aren't part of that, since we are concrete andit's an abstract representation. Rather, we are part of the concrete worldthat it accurately represents. As for your deceived other-worldly people,
they don't exist. People are concrete, ersatz worlds are abstract. Whatexist are not other-worldly people but abstract misrepresentations.
Then I asked how it could be contingent which world was actual, unlessactuality were relative rather than absolute. The ersatzer replies thus.
Exactly as you explain the contingency in terms of relative actualityof worlds, so I explain it in terms of relative actualisation of ersatzworlds. A contingent matter is disputed: it comes out different accordingto different ersatz worlds. Each ersatz world is actualised accordingto itself and not according to the others, thereby they disagree aboutwhich one is actualised, therefore that is a contingent matter. You thinkyou objected to absolute actualisation; but really you objected to doingwithout relative actualisation. But I don't do without it; I needn't choosebetween relative and absolute, I have them both.
I cannot fault these replies. Not given their theoretical setting: the singleconcrete world, the one correct abstract representation, the manymisrepresentations.2 I can only insist that they would make no sense atall in the different setting to which I objected; the many worlds, no dualityof concrete world versus abstract representations, and an alleged absolutedistinction that singles out one of the many worlds.3It is plain how ersatz possibilia may replace the real thing in our variousanalyses. It is possible that donkeys talk iff there is some abstract ersatzworld according to which donkeys talk - no other-worldly talking donkeysare required, only a false abstract representation. Humphrey might havewon the election iff some abstract ersatz world falsely represents him aswinning - but however he may be misrepresented, our Humphrey the loser2In 'Attitudes De Dicto and De Se' I objected that the ersatzer seemed to make it anon-contingent matter which ersatz world is actualised. I had not fully appreciated thedifference between his theoretical setting and my own. I thank John G. Bennett for settingme right.
31 worded the ersatzer's replies in my own way; but I think almost every recent ersatzistauthor has said something similar. See, among others, Adams in 'Theories of Actuality'and Stalnaker in 'Possible Worlds'.

140 Paradise on the Cheap?
is still the only Humphrey there is. And so on, across the board. Mutatismutandis, the analyses survive. Therefore genuine modal realism maysafely be rejected, since we have a way to match its theoretical benefitsand leave its 'crazy' ontology behind. Why pay? You can enterphilosophers' paradise on the cheap.
So say the ersatzers. But not exactly so; few would state the positionquite as I have done. Most of them would say not that possible worldsare to be replaced by abstract representations, but rather that possibleworlds are abstract representations. This is a mere issue of terminology.
Even so, I think it matters. It's wrong to say that the ersatz modal realistsand I agree at least that possible worlds exist, and disagree only aboutwhether those worlds are abstract or concrete. That understates the extentto which they disagree with me (and with one another). We agree thatthere are entities fit to occupy certain theoretical roles, but that is all.
The ersatzers just do not believe in what I call worlds; and sometimes -
depending on which version of ersatzism we consider - I just do not believein what they call worlds. Compare the foolish suggestion that all of usat least agree that God exists, although we disagree about His nature:
some say He's a supernatural person, some say He's the cosmos in allits glory, some say He's the triumphal march of history, . . . . Giventhat much disagreement about 'His' nature, there's nothing we allbelieve in!
Further, it would be wrong for the ersatzers to say in general thatabstract representations are to be called 'worlds', unless they say it evenwhen there is a concrete claimant to the name. Then what of the actualisedersatz world versus the concrete world it represents? Will they say thatsome abstract representation is a 'world', and the concrete totality weare part of is not? Not a good position for the would-be friends of commonsense! So I think the ersatzers would do better to say that they rejectpossible worlds and know how to do without them.4Ersatzism is indeed attractive. I must agree that the ersatzers have theadvantage in agreement with common sense about what there is, and thisis an advantage well worth having. And their abstract ersatz possibiliacan indeed do much of the work of the real thing. But I insist that theypay a high price. I cannot say, once and for all, what that price is; becauseersatzism comes in different versions, which have different advantagesand different drawbacks. I do not offer any serious objection that appliesacross the board. But I do claim that each version, in its own way, isin serious trouble. In different ways for different versions, the ersatzers4Van Inwagen, in An Essay on Free Will, pages 232-3, cites C. S. Lewis to the effectthat a 'world' may be a 'state of affairs'. But Lewis meant a state of affairs distinctiveof some historical epoch, as when the new world is revealed after the saints come marchingin. That usage is irrelevant to the contest between concrete and abstract worlds.

The Ersatzist Programme141must resort to primitive facts where genuine modal realists can offeranalyses; or their ways of making ersatz worlds distort the facts ofmodality; or their ontology is after all not so safe and sane. On balance,
I think ersatzism is somewhat worse off than the genuine modal realismthat I favour. Paradise on the cheap, like the famous free lunch, is notto be had. Make of this what you will. Join the genuine modal realists;
or foresake genuine and ersatz worlds alike.
(Or rather, foresake all-purpose ersatz worlds, capable of replacingthe genuine ones throughout our analyses. It will remain possible to useersatz worlds for limited purposes, for instance when it is harmless toconflate certain possibilities which a construction of ersatz worlds hasdifficulty in distinguishing.)
One question seems to me crucial in dividing the versions: how is itthat the ersatz worlds represent? In other words, how is it that such-and-
such is the case according to a certain ersatz world? Different answersto that question lead to different views about the metaphysical natureof the ersatz worlds and individuals, about their power to replace genuinepossibilia, and about the primitives that ersatzism will require. Differentanswers thereby yield ersatzisms with different advantages and drawbacks.
I distinguish three principal versions: linguistic, on which ersatz worldsare like stories or theories, constructions out of words of some language,
and represent in virtue of meanings given by stipulation; pictorial, onwhich they are like pictures, or scale models, and represent byisomorphism; and magical, on which they just represent, it is simply theirnature to do so, and there's nothing to be said about how they do it.
Three versions of ersatzism; but I distinguish only two main kinds ofersatzist authors. There are some who explicitly support various formsof linguistic ersatzism: for instance Jeffrey, Carnap, Skyrms, and (at onepoint) Quine. I know of none who explicitly support the pictorial ormagical versions. Instead, there are authors who favour nondescriptersatzism. These authors - Plantinga, Stalnaker, and many others - keepsilent, or explicitly decline to commit themselves, on the questions thatseem to me crucial in dividing the versions. In particular, they do notsay how the representing works. Hence I tend to think of them as favouringthe magical version. But that's not quite fair: they never say that theirersatz worlds have the sort of internal structure that would permit linguisticor pictorial representation, but they don't deny it either. Since the differentversions meet with different objections, that makes it hard to pin anyobjection at all on an author who keeps neutral. His position may seemto have the advantages of all the versions and the drawbacks of none!
Thus I will do better to examine the versions than the authors; and whenI attack a position that nobody has ever explicitly supported, you mustsee me as putting a trilemma against the neutralists. I promise not to wasteyour time on any version that I myself think is unworthy of respectful

142Paradise on the Cheap?
attention; and not to knowingly overlook any version that escapes allmy objections.
3.2 Linguistic ErsatzismLinguistic ersatzism typically constructs its ersatz worlds as maximalconsistent sets of sentences. The language in which the worlds are mademight just be ordinary language, more or less; as in Richard Jeffrey'sproposal to take ersatz worlds as 'complete, consistent novels'. Such anoveldescribes a possible world . . . in as much detail as is possible withoutexceeding the resources of the agent's language. But if talk of possibleworlds seems dangerously metaphysical, we can focus attention on thenovels themselves, and speak of a complete, consistent novel as actuallybeing a possible world. (The Logic of Decision, section 12.8.)
The ersatz worlds represent by saying. If the worldmaking language isplain English, for instance, then it is the case according to a novel thata donkey talks iff that novel contains the sentence 'A donkey talks'. Ifthe language is not plain English, the ersatzer will have to specify aninterpretation for it. That done, he can say that it is the case accordingto a novel that a donkey talks iff that novel contains a sentence which,
as interpreted, means that a donkey talks. Call this explicit representationthat a donkey talks. But there might not be any one sentence which meansexactly that; there may not even be any set of sentences which jointlymean exactly that a donkey talks and nothing more. If so, we must saythat it is the case according to a novel that a donkey talks iff the novelcontains several sentences (in the worst case, an infinite set) which, asinterpreted, jointly imply that a donkey talks. Call this implicitrepresentation that a donkey talks.
The worldmaking language had better not be plain English. Jeffreymentions the need to idealise the language somewhat 'in the sense thatthe (declarative) sentences of that language have fixed . . . truth values,
independent of the contexts of their utterance'. (Unlike me, an ersatzerwould not take that to prohibit contingency. He does not believe in other-
worldly contexts of utterance.) Some further idealisation is needed to makesure there are determinate truth values at all: the worldmaking languagehad better be disambiguated and precise.
We might take a sentence as a sequence of its words. Or, for the sakeof disambiguation, we might do better to take the sentences as parsed:
let a sentence be the sequence of phrases which are its immediateconstituents, let each phrase be the sequence of phrases which are its

Linguistic Ersatzism143immediate constituents, and so on down to phrases which are single words.
Thus ersatz worlds turn out to be set-theoretic constructions out of words.
A word in turn might be taken as the set of its particular inscriptions;
or as the set of spatiotemporal regions wherein it is pronounced. Thusthe ersatz worlds are set-theoretic constructions out of parts of the concreteworld.
That is how linguistic ersatzism fulfils its promise of safe and saneontology: it relies on ontology that most philosophers are committed toin any case. There it does indeed have the advantage over my modalrealism. The point is not that its ersatz worlds should be easy to believein, because they are in some ill-defined sense abstract; the point is thatwe believe in them already. If such constructions are properly called`abstract', well and good. If not, no harm done.
(What shall a would-be ersatzer do if he regards set theory withscepticism, and prefers to avoid any ontological commitment to sets? Musthe reject linguistic ersatzism just because of its set-theoretic constructions?
I think not. For surely set-theoretic talk does make some kind of sense,
and its seeming existential quantifications do mean something true. Thequestion is how they are to be understood. If they can be understoodonly at face value, then I conclude that the project of disbelieving in setsis hopeless; in which case the sceptical ersatzer may as well give in anduse set theory. But if they can be understood in some more innocent way,
as the sceptic must hope, then again he may use set theory, for then hisuse of it is innocent.)
I once raised a problem of cardinality against linguistic ersatzism. 'Ifwe take "language" at all literally, so that sentences are finite stringsover a finite alphabet, there are not enough sets of sentences to go around'
(Counterfactuals, page 90). There are at most continuum many sets ofstrings, a fortiori at most continuum many ersatz worlds. The same istrue if we take sentences as parsed, provided the language has a finitevocabulary and each phrase has finitely many immediate constituents.
But it is easy to argue that there are more than continuum manypossibilities we ought to distinguish. It is at least possible to havecontinuum many spacetime points; each point may be occupied by matteror may be vacant; since anything may coexist with anything, anydistribution of occupancy and vacancy is possible; and there are morethan continuum many such distributions. So either there are differentdistributions that get described alike, or there are distributions that donot get described at all. Either different possibilities are misrepresentedas the same, or some possibilities are misrepresented as impossible. Thatjust gets the facts of modality wrong.55This complaint is not addressed to Jeffrey. His novels will not do as general-purposeersatz worlds, but they may be well suited for the limited purpose for which he introduced

144Paradise on the Cheap?
My argument was right, for what it is worth. But it is not a problem.
There is no reason why linguistic ersatzism needs to 'take "language"
at all literally' and burden itself with the two assumptions of finitudethat make the problem. It is necessary that the ersatzer should be ableto present his worldmaking language, using his original natural languageto specify its syntax and interpretation, when he presents his theory. Butit is not necessary that the worldmaking language should itself be anythinglike a natural language, or that there should be any way to speak or writeits sentences, or that its vocabulary should be finite, or that its sentencesshould be finite in length. All we need is language in a generalised sense:
a system of structures that can be parsed and interpreted. The words canbe anything that safe and sane ontology has to offer. They can beindividuals that are part of the concrete world, or set-theoreticconstructions out of those, or pure sets, or anything else we believe in.
It does not matter what they are, if they get their role in representingby arbitrary stipulation. So we could have an infinite number of words:
let all the real numbers serve as words, or all the points or regions ofspacetime, and stipulate in some wholesale way what they are to mean.
Alternatively, we can use infinitary connectives to build infinitely longsentences from the resources of a finite vocabulary. Either method wouldgive us a way to build sentences that say explicitly, about each of acontinuum of points, whether it is vacant or occupied.6 This is well-
explored ground: model theory normally treats finitary language withfinite vocabulary as a special case. Cardinality problems do not threatenlinguistic ersatzism, though they do teach us how to go about it.
Carnap made extensive use of linguistic ersatz worlds in his writingson logic, semantics, and probability. At first he took the ersatz worldsas sets which contain, for every atomic sentence of a certain interpretedformal system, either that sentence or its negation but not both; and whichcontain no other sentences. These are maximal consistent sets of sentencesof a worldmaking language which is a fragment of the given system. Thislanguage may have an infinite vocabulary of predicates and names, sothem: to serve as points in a structure that represents an agent's system of belief and desire.
More generally, many of the objections I shall be putting forward later in this section,
either against linguistic ersatzism generally or against particular forms of it, would notapply to certain special-purpose uses of linguistic ersatz worlds. When I complain, as Ishall, that there are various ways for different possibilities to get conflated in their linguisticdescriptions, that may be harmless when we want to use ersatz possibilia to characterisethe content of thought for a subject who has no way to distinguish the conflated possibilitiesin his perception and conduct. (Stalnaker makes this point, though not in defence especiallyof linguistic ersatzism.) And when I complain about problems with possibilities that involvealien natural properties, those problems will not hinder the treatment of not very far-
fetched counterfactual suppositions, for instance in a counterfactual analysis of causation.
'See Roper, 'Toward an Eliminative Reduction of Possible Worlds', page 51; andBricker, Worlds and Propositions, pages 174-89.

Linguistic Ersatzism145we needn't worry about cardinality; but except for (single) negation, it isdevoid of resources for compounding its sentences. (We shall consider laterwhy such impoverishment of the worldmaking language might be wanted.)
Such a set 'is called a state-description . . . , because it obviously gives acomplete description of a possible state of the universe of individuals withrespect to all properties and relations expressed by predicates of the system.
Thus the state-descriptions represent Leibniz' possible worlds orWittgenstein's possible states of affairs' (Meaning and Necessity, page 9).
Note two difficulties with this method. Everything must have a name, elseour state-descriptions will be silent about the nameless things; and nothingmay have two names, else our state-descriptions may both affirm anddeny, of the same thing under different names, that it satisfies a predicate.
One solution, the Lagadonian method, exploits our freedom to takethe words as anything we please. Do we need one and only one namefor everything in some large domain? Just declare that each of these thingsnames itself. A Lagadonian language is inconvenient for some uses, asGulliver observed; but it's handy for making state-descriptions. A state-
description in a Lagadonian language will be a set-theoretic constructionout of the predicates and the negation symbol, whatever those are, togetherwith the members of the given domain, each one serving as its own name.
In effect, this is the solution Carnap adopted in his later writings. In 'ABasic System of Inductive Logic', for instance, he takes ersatz worldsas models, in the standard model-theoretic sense. A model consists ofa domain, together with an assignment to each n-ary predicate of a setof n-tuples of members of the domain; these being the n-tuples that satisfythat predicate according to that model. If we hold the domain fixed (asCarnap stipulates) models correspond one to one with state-descriptionsin the Lagadonian language. We could think of the model as a transformed`surface structure' of the sentence obtained from the state-descriptionby infinite conjunction. Or we could just think directly of the model asan infinitary sentence: a structure that can be parsed and interpreted,
a linguistic representation or misrepresentation of the world.
(If models are to serve thus as ersatz worlds, they had better not beregarded at the same time as interpreting the language. An assignmentof extensions to predicates depends partly on what the predicates mean,
partly on contingent matters of fact. If it is to represent the latter, theformer must be settled beforehand. Carnap is clear that the worldmakinglanguage is presented complete with interpretation. This double role ofmodels has been well discussed by Etchemendy.)
If we also believe in universals as constituents of the concrete world, asperhaps we should, we can carry the Lagadonian scheme one step further.?
?Similar constructions would be possible starting with tropes; they are discussed inJohnston, Particulars and Persistence.

146Paradise on the Cheap?
Suppose that the concrete world is somehow divisible into 'elementary'particulars and universals, in such a way that the whole truth about itsupervenes on the truth about which of these particulars instantiate whichof these universals. Let these universals and particulars serve as thevocabulary of a language. Just as we can use each particular as its ownname, so we can use each universal as its own predicate. It is satisfiedby just those particulars that instantiate it. Then a pair of a particularand a universal can serve as an atomic sentence according to which thatparticular instantiates that universal. More generally, if some of theuniversals are polyadic, a `tuple consisting of an n-ary universal followedby n particulars can serve as an atomic sentence according to which thoseparticulars jointly instantiate that universal. And a state description ormodel in that language can serve as an ersatz world. (We don't even needa negation sign: take all sets of atomic sentences as state-descriptions,
and stipulate that all and only the atomic sentences included in a givenstate-description are true according to it, and the rest are false acordingto it.) An ersatz world so constructed purports to represent the variouselementary particulars instantiating the various elementary universals,
and we run through all consistent alternatives as to which instantiate which.
Such a scheme, minus my gloss on it as in a sense linguistic, is consideredin Brian Skyrms's `Tractarian Nominalism'. As in the Tractatus, the actualworld is the totality of facts; and likewise for other worlds, except thatthe 'facts' of which they are totalities sometimes are false, so not reallyfacts. Atomic facts suffice to build the worlds; others supervene. Strictlyspeaking, facts are 'primitive entities' for Skyrms. But we may 'in thevulgar way, think of an atomic fact as associated with a representationconsisting of . . . an n-ary relation followed by n objects' (page 200).
Thus, setting aside the 'primitive entities' themselves, we get vulgarrepresentations which amount to maximal consistent sets of sentencesof a Lagadonian language.
A language that is interpreted in the Lagadonian way is, nevertheless,
interpreted. The ersatzer who presents his worldmaking language muststill stipulate how it is interpreted, even if what he stipulates is that ithas a Lagadonian interpretation. That is not, of course, the onlyinterpretation the language could bear. It is just an especially easy oneto specify. A real number could serve as a name for itself, but it couldequally well serve as a name for itself plus seventeen. I could be my ownname, but alternatively I could be yours; or I could be put to some otheruse in a language, say as a punctuation mark.
There is another way we might take advantage of our freedom to useanything we like as words. Provided we believe in the mathematicaluniverse, understood perhaps as the realm of pure sets, we can draw ourvocabulary from there. Thus linguistic ersatzism merges with what mightseem to be a rival plan: the use of mathematical representations as our

Linguistic Ersatzism147ersatz worlds. Take a simple example. Suppose we have a coordinatesystem for a flat spacetime. Then we can associate with each point aquadruple of real numbers. Suppose we think there are only two waysa point can be: occupied or vacant. And suppose we think that it is enoughto specify the distribution of matter over the points: all else superveneson that. Then a mathematical ersatz world could be a set of quadruples,
specifying the set of points that are occupied. Equivalently, we couldtake the characteristic function of the set: the ersatz world is a set of pairs,
and it pairs a quadruple with 1 to represent a point as occupied, or with0 to represent it as vacant. This mathematical representation is equallya linguistic representation: the worldmaking language uses 1 and 0 aspredicates meaning 'occupied' and 'vacant', the quadruples name thepoints, name-predicate pairs are atomic sentences, two sentences thatpredicate occupancy and vacancy of the same point are inconsistent, andthus the ersatz world turns out to be a maximal consistent set of sentences.
Quine is not known as a friend of possible worlds, ersatz or otherwise.
But in his 'Propositional Objects' he briefly proposed that classes of ersatzworlds might characterise the attitudes of an animal without language.
(It was not his final proposal; he went on to transform his ersatz worldsfirst into ersatz possible individuals - centred worlds - and then intostimulation patterns.) His illustrative construction, based on fictitious`Democritean' physics, was roughly as above.
There was one further step. What do we think when one set ofquadruples, or the characteristic function thereof, differs from anotheronly by some transformation of coordinates? Do we have two possibilitiesrepresented, or one possibility represented two ways? Quine, as we wouldexpect of him, takes the latter view for a wide range of transformations.
He therefore factors out the artificial differences by taking equivalenceclasses. It is possible, albeit tiresome, to describe what he does in linguisticterms, as follows. Begin with the characteristic functions rather than thesets. Interpret 1 and 0 as predicates, as before. Interpret a quadruple nowas an open term, with a tacit free variable which ranges over coordinatesystems. Relative to any given coordinate system, the quadruple denotesthe point with the proper coordinates in that system. The pair of aquadruple with 1 or 0 now becomes an open formula, with the same tacitvariable, satisfied by some coordinate systems and not others. An entirecharacteristic function, which is a set of these formulae, is interpreted asthe existential quantification of the infinitary conjunction of its members.
Two of the characteristic functions that differ only by appropriatetransformations of coordinates imply one another; whereas two that differotherwise are inconsistent. Thus an equivalence class of characteristicfunctions turns out to be a maximal consistent set of sentences.
Democritean physics is very simplified indeed; but my point appliesto other systems of mathematical representation, more realistic and more

148Paradise on the Cheap?
versatile. (I don't think we could specify one versatile enough to coverall possibilities, however, for reasons given at the end of this section.)
If mathematical ersatz worlds take the form of trajectories through purelymathematical phase spaces, or vectors in purely mathematical Hilbertspaces, or what have you, I take it that it will still be possible to interpretthem linguistically: as sets of sentences, or as single infinitary sentences,
in some suitable worldmaking language. My point is not that we willunderstand mathematical ersatzism better by seeing it as linguistic in afairly general, and hence fairly empty, sense. It's just that when I cometo criticise linguistic ersatzism, I would like my objections to apply aswidely as possible.
It is worth mentioning one trick that is possible in the Democriteanspecial case, though so far as I know it doesn't generalise. We areassuming that only the abstract realm could provide the makings of aparadise of ersatz possibilia; and in this section, we are supposing thatthe ersatz worlds will be set-theoretic constructions, impure or pure.
But if you are not only a Democritean but also a haecceitist (seesection 4.4) about spacetime points, you can have concrete ersatz worlds.
Presumably a spacetime point is concrete; a spatiotemporal region is justthe mereological sum of its points; so presumably a region also is concrete.
That goes for any region, however bizarrely shaped. Take any regionas an ersatz world according to which exactly the points of that regionare occupied and all other points are vacant. The ersatz worlds overlapgreatly, since they are all built from the same constituents in the waythat is characteristic of linguistic representation. Thus they all fit intothe single spacetime of the concrete world. The region consisting of alland only the occupied points is the actualised ersatz world. Somethingvery like this appears in Cresswell's 'The World is Everything that is theCase'. (He offers it as an example only, insisting that various differentconstructions would equally well serve his purposes.) However Cresswelltakes his regions as sets rather than mereological sums of points; therebydeclining, as is only right, to take advantage of the peculiarities of thespecial case.
Besides the ersatz possible worlds, we also need ersatz possible individuals:
representations of how an individual that is less than an entire world mightbe. My modal realism provides possible individuals simply as the properparts of possible worlds; for instance small parts, such as people. Theyfigure prominently in the applications of possibilia. Especially so if, asI advocate, haecceitism is rejected and the diversity of possibilities foran individual is understood as the diversity of possible individuals inworlds, not as diversity of worlds. (See section 4.4.) Linguistic ersatzismcannot follow the same plan. Its ersatz worlds are sets of sentences, andtheir parts are just their subsets. These are incomplete descriptions (or

Linguistic Ersatzism149misdescriptions) of the whole world, not complete descriptions of partsof the world.
Just as we make linguistic ersatz worlds as complete descriptions ofan entire world, so we should make our linguistic ersatz possible individualsas complete descriptions of parts of the world. We can take them asmaximal consistent sets of open sentences of the worldmaking language,
with a free pronoun or variable; or, equivalently, as maximal consistentsets of complex predicates. Just as a set of sentences is consistent if theymight all be true, so a set of open sentences is consistent if they mightall be true of something, taken as value of the common pronoun orvariable; and a set of predicates is consistent if something might fall underall of them. Our previous discussion of ersatz worlds carries over, mutatismutandis, to ersatz individuals.
On my own view, a possible individual exists at a possible world bybeing part of it. But a linguistic ersatz individual is in no sense part ofan ersatz world; what we have instead is that an ersatz individual maybe actualised according to an ersatz world. That is so if the ersatz individualand the ersatz world mirror one another. Suppose the ersatz world consistsof sentences P, Q, R, . . .; then the mirroring ersatz individual mightconsist in part of open sentences:
x is part of a world where P,
x is part of a world where Q,
x is part of a world where R,
Thus the ersatz individual is by no means a purely intrinsic description;
the description is extrinsic in a big way. By the time we are done describingan individual completely, we have en passant described the world whereinit is situated. In the other direction, suppose the ersatz individual consistsof open sentences Fx, Gx, Hx, . . .; then the mirroring ersatz world mightconsist in part of sentences:
For some x, Fx,
For some x, Fx and Gx,
For some x, Fx and Gx and Hx,
(If we have infinitary conjunction, one infinite sentence can serve insteadof this sequence of finite approximations.) By the time we are donedescribing a world completely, we have en passant described all theindividuals within it.

150Paradise on the Cheap?
Just as we distinguish explicit and implicit representation generally,
so we can distinguish explicit and implicit mirroring. The mirroring isexplicit if the mirroring sentences - sentences of the worldmaking languagewith the appropriate meanings, as shown above - appear as members ofthe ersatz world and the ersatz individual; it is implicit if those sentencesdo not themselves appear, but if they are implied by sentences that doappear.
(What if the worldmaking language lacks the logical resources toformulate the mirroring sentences, as happens, for instance, if its onlysentences are atomic and negated atomic? Then the implication in implicitmirroring must go from sets of sentences in the original worldmakinglanguage to sentences of a richer language in which the missing resourceshave been supplied.)
As ersatz worlds and ersatz individuals mirror one another, so likewisedo two different ersatz individuals that are actualised according to thesame ersatz world. Suppose one of them consists of the open sentencesFx, Gx, Hx, . . . and the other one consists of Lx, Mx, Nx, . . . . Thenthe first will contain open sentences that mean or that imply:
x coexists with something y such that Ly,
x coexists with something y such that Ly and My,
x coexists with something y such that Ly and My and Ny,
And the second will contain open sentences that mean or that imply:
x coexists with something y such that Fy,
x coexists with something y such that Fy and Gy,
x coexists with something y such that Fy and Gy and Hy,
Likewise, in a more complicated way, for the mutual mirroring of infinitelymany ersatz individuals all actualised according to a single ersatz world.
This completes my exposition of linguistic ersatzism. It is a popularapproach, and deservedly so. It relies on a familiar and well-understoodmethod of representing; and it delivers ersatz worlds and individuals bymeans of ontology that is almost uncontroversial. However it is opento two serious objections.
My first objection is that modality must be taken as primitive. Thishappens in one or both of two different ways. First, via consistency. Not

Linguistic Ersatzism151any set of sentences of the worldmaking language is an ersatz world.
It has to be a consistent set. Else it could not describe the concreteworld correctly, no matter how the concrete world was. An inconsistentset might be an ersatz impossible world, but it is not an ersatzpossible world. Further, an ersatz world must be maximal consistent.
That is, it must be a consistent set whose consistency would be destroyedby the addition of any other sentence of the worldmaking language.
Else it may describe the world incompletely, conflating two differentpossibilities that would be distinguished if we extended it to a largerconsistent set; or if not that, it may leave implicit something thatthe language has the resources for representing explicitly. So in order tosay which things of the right nature - which sets of sentences ofthe worldmaking language - are the ersatz worlds, we need to distinguishthe consistent ones. That is prima facie a modal distinction: a set ofsentences is consistent iff those sentences, as interpreted, could all be truetogether.
The second need for primitive modality comes via implicit representation.
It may be that so-and-so, according to a certain ersatz world, not becausethere is a sentence included in that world which just means that so-and-
so, no more and no less; but because there are sentences which jointlyimply that so-and-so. There might be a single sentence which implies thatso-and-so but doesn't just mean that so-and-so because it implies morebesides; or there might be a finite or infinite set of sentences which jointlyimply that so-and-so. This implication is prima facie modal: a set ofsentences implies that so-and-so iff those sentences, as interpreted, couldnot all be true together unless it were also true that so-and-so; in otherwords, if it is necessary that if those sentences are all true together, thenso-and-so.
In section 3.1, I called attention to one case of implicit representation:
each ersatz world E represents that the concrete world is as E says it is,
and not as any other ersatz world says it is; and thereby E implicitlyrepresents that it alone succeeds in correctly representing the concreteworld, therefore that it alone is actualised. This is a special case, becausehere it seems that the representation almost has to be implicit. How couldan ersatz world explicitly represent its own success and the others' failures?
It would have to explicitly represent the concrete world, and itself correctlyrepresenting the concrete world, and countless other ersatz worldsincorrectly representing the concrete world. But each ersatz world thusrepresented must itself represent, inter alia, all of the ersatz worlds. Itis as if we had a library, and every book in the library describes fully -
say, by unabridged direct quotation - every book in the library. Booksbeing the finite things they are, of course that is impossible. It is not clearto me how it would be for ersatz worlds. At any rate, there's no sensegoing to extremes to avoid implicit representation in this case. Even if

152Paradise on the Cheap?
we did, we would still need primitive modality elsewhere, to defineconsistency or to define implicit representation or both.
It is clear that we have some choice about where the carpet is to bulge.
The worldmaking language can be rich or poor in its expressive resources.
If it is rich, like an idealisation of plain English, the problem of consistencygets hard and the problem of implicit representation gets easy. The morethe language has the power to tell us explicitly what is so according tothe ersatz world, the less need we have for implicit representation. Butthe more the language can say explicitly, the more opportunities it hasto say one thing and imply the contrary - that is, to fall into inconsistency.
In fact, an inconsistent set of sentences can simply be regarded as onethat represents explicitly that so-and-so while it also represents implicitlythat not so-and-so; and the more can be represented explicitly, the moreways such a conflict can arise.
That is why we might prefer an impoverished worldmaking languagethat lacks the resources to explicitly represent anything very complicated.
Such are Carnap's languages of state-descriptions or models. Theseworldmaking languages are excised from richer systems by removing thelogical vocabulary, except perhaps for (single) negation. It seems easyto define maximal consistency in a language with nothing but atomic andnegated atomic sentences. Just make sure you have a state-description.
That is, make sure that for each atomic sentence you have either it orits negation but not both. Likewise if we have a Lagadonian languagein which the names are self-naming elementary particulars and thepredicates are self-predicating elementary universals, or if we codedistributions of matter by pairing coordinate quadruples with 0 or 1, itseems that a straightforward combinatorial definition could suffice totell us which sets of sentences are maximal consistent. But in return theproblem of implicit representation becomes difficult, since there's preciouslittle that these languages can represent explicitly.
It matters little whether we take a rich language and face a problemof saying which sets of its sentences are consistent, or whether insteadwe take a poor language and face the problem of saying what its setsof sentences imply. Either way, the same remedy comes to mind: we couldreplace primitive modality by a syntactic surrogate. We define consistencyor implication in terms of formal deduction, and we define our ersatzworlds or their implicit representation from that. Our syntactic surrogatemight be limited to the worldmaking language, if that language is richand our goal is to characterise its maximal consistent sets. Or our surrogatemight have to apply to an enrichment of the worldmaking language -
the union of the worldmaking language and English, perhaps - if theworldmaking language is poor and our goal is to characterise implicitrepresentation.
Of course, our syntactic surrogate had better not yield narrowly logical

Linguistic Ersatzism153consistency or narrowly logical implication - that is, consistency undersome reinterpretation or other of all but the logical vocabulary, orimplication that is invariant under all such reinterpretations. That wouldfalsify the facts of modality by yielding allegedly consistent ersatz worldsaccording to which there are married bachelors, numbers with more thanone successor, and suchlike impossibilities; or by giving us no ersatz worldswhich, when they explicitly represent a distribution of matter overspacetime or what have you, thereby implicitly represent such supervenientglobal facts as that there is a talking donkey. However, it is permissibleto specify that certain sentences of the worldmaking language (or anenrichment of it) are axiomatic; then narrowly logical consistency orimplication can take us the rest of the way. A putative ersatz world ina rich language should (1) be logically consistent, and (2) contain all thespecified axioms. An ersatz world in a poor language implicitly representsthat a donkey talks iff its sentences, together with the specified axiomsin an enriched language, logically imply a sentence of the enriched languagewhich means that a donkey talks. (If the enrichment combines theworldmaking language with a substantial part of English, we can simplyrequire that the ersatz world plus the axioms imply the very sentence 'Adonkey talks'.)
The question is whether we can specify the proper axiom set withoutcovertly relying on primitive modality. I think we cannot. But before Ioffer good reasons why not, I must disown two bad reasons.
The first bad reason is one that I advanced in Counterfactuals(page 85). We don't want logically consistent but mathematicallyinconsistent ersatz worlds; and we don't want to lose mathematicallyimplicit representation. So the axiom set had better include themathematical truths, so far as these are expressible in the vocabulary ofthe language in question. Either the worldmaking language itself, or elseits enrichment for implicit representation, had better be rich enough toexpress quite a lot of mathematics. But then how are we to specify theset of mathematical truths? It is impossible, of course, to specify themas exactly the sentences that meet some effective syntactic test; or evenas exactly the theorems of some formal system. To specify them modallyis to give up on the plan of providing syntactic surrogates for primitivemodality. How else? I used to think this decisive. But Roper, in 'Towardan Eliminative Reduction of Possible Worlds', asks why we may notspecify the mathematical axioms model-theoretically. Why aren't we freeto say, for instance, that the arithmetical truths are those sentences ofthe arithmetical part of the language that are true in standard modelsof arithmetic? Why indeed? I think Roper is right to insist that we may.
There is indeed a serious philosophical problem about how we can referunequivocally to the standard models, but we do seem to manage itsomehow. If we can refer to standard models, never mind how, then we

154Paradise on the Cheap?
may do so when we specify our axioms, and thereby define our surrogatesfor primitive modality, and thereby define our ersatz worlds and ourimplicit representation. The task is to bypass primitive modality in ouranalyses. Effectiveness is not in the bargain.
The second bad reason arises out of a misunderstanding about whatcircularity is. When he specifies his axioms, as a step toward definingersatz worlds and implicit representation and eventually modality itself,
the ersatzer presumably is guided by his pre-existing modal opinions. Headds this truth to his axioms because he takes it to be necessary, declinesto add that one because he takes it to be contingent. Then even if he endswith a correct definition of necessity and contingency, isn't his procedurecircular? - No. Circularity is a matter of what you analyse in terms ofwhat; it is not a matter of why you think your analysis is right. It is notcircularity if you build your analysis to give the answers it ought to,
excercising your understanding of the analysandum as you go. You mightas well say that an analysis of 'cousin' in terms of 'parent' was circular,
because you wouldn't have given that analysis if you hadn't already hada working command of the word `cousin'! The object of analysis is toreduce our burden of primitive notions, and to make tacit understandingexplicit - not to bootstrap ourselves into understanding what we didn'tunderstand at all beforehand.
Now for the good reasons. I think there are at least two places whereprimitive modality will not go away. The axioms to do the job may exist,
but the ersatzer will not be in a position to specify them. He can onlydeclare: the axioms shall include whichever sentences of such-and-suchform are necessarily true. Once he says that, all his analyses from thereon are modal.
The first place has to do with the fundamental properties and relationsof simple things: as it might be, the positive and negative charge of pointparticles. Even a stripped-down worldmaking languge had better be ableto speak explicitly of such matters, so our present problem concerns theconsistency of ersatz worlds, rather than implicit representation. Supposewe have predicates meaning 'positive' and 'negative'. Then it is consistent,
in the narrowly logical sense, to say that something is both positive andnegative. If our ersatz worlds were state-descriptions in the given language,
for which the only test of consistency is that no atomic sentence shouldbe included along with its own negation, we would have ersatz worldsaccording to which some particles are both positive and negative. Thisseems wrong: here we seem to have an inconsistency which is not narrowlylogical, but arises because positive and negative charge are twodeterminates of one determinable. (Thus stripping down the worldmakinglanguage doesn't altogether smooth out this bulge in the carpet.) Theremedy is plain: we need an axiom. Not in the stripped-down worldmakinglanguage itself, but in a suitable enrichment of it, we can form a sentence

Linguistic Ersatzism155to say that nothing is both positive and negative: call this the axiomof unique charge. We can declare that only those state-descriptionsshall count as ersatz worlds that are logically consistent with thisaxiom.
(Or we could declare outright that no ersatz world shall include twoatomic sentences that predicate 'positive' and 'negative' of the same thing;
but, for convenience, let's suppose the problematic part of the projectto be concentrated in the choice of axioms.)
But wait! Maybe it is just a matter of contingent fact that positive andnegative charge never coexist. Lawful fact, but that is still contingent.
If so, then inclusion of the proposed axiom of unique charge wouldmisrepresent the facts of modality. But if not, if positive and negativecharge really are incompatible determinables, then omission of the axiomwould misrepresent the facts. It is risky to write the axiom in, it is riskyto leave it out. If the ersatzer knew the facts of modality, he would knowwhat to do. But he doesn't and he can't. What is he supposed to do -
make them up out of whole cloth? That gets the facts wrong even if heguesses right! The only safe course is to resort to primitive modality. Thedeclaration must be conditional: if it is impossible for any one particleto be both positively and negatively charged, then let there be an axiomof unique charge.
Mind you, it would be no small advance if we could explain modalityin general by taking one very special case of it - the incompatibility betweendeterminates of one determinable, and even that only for the special caseof a few 'fundamental' properties and relations - as primitive. If that wereto be had, the offer of safe and sane ontology with just a smidgin ofprimitive modality would indeed be hard to refuse. But it is not to behad. There is another place where primitive modality will not go away,
and there the need is more extensive. The ontological gain would haveto be worth not a little primitive modality but a lot.
The second place has to do with the relation of global to localdescriptions. We describe the spatiotemporal arrangement and funda-
mental properties of point particles in infinite detail - and lo, wehave implied that there is a talking donkey, or we have fallen intoinconsistency if we also say explicitly that there is not. The implicationor inconsistency is not narrowly logical, thanks to a differencein vocabulary. We need to cover it somehow. We have a problemabout consistency if the worldmaking language speaks both of local andglobal matters, both of particles and of donkeys. Or we have a problemabout implicit representation if the worldmaking language speaksonly of local matters, and yet the ersatz worlds implicitly represent globalmatters. We need connecting axioms: conditionals to the effect thatif - here follows a very long, perhaps infinitary, description of thearrangement and properties of the point particles - then there is a talking

156Paradise on the Cheap?
donkey. If we are not to get the facts of modality wrong, such axiomshad better be written into the definitions of consistency and implication.
That would be impossible in practice, of course. Maybe the axiomswould be infinite both in length and in number; I would suppose not,
but at any rate it is safe to say that nobody could produce them. So nolinguistic ersatzer can complete his theory. Unless, of course, he doesthe obvious thing: declares wholesale that among all conditionals withlocal antecedents and global consequents, exactly those shall be axiomsthat are necessarily true.
Suppose, per impossibile, that the ersatzer did produce the requisiteaxioms; and, what is still more marvellous, that he persuaded us thathe had them right. I am still inclined, though hesitantly, to raise anobjection of principle. The job was to analyse modality (and also severalother things for which genuine or ersatz possibilia come in handy). Itwas not also part of the job to analyse 'talking donkey'. But he did; forhe needed axioms that would tell him, for every possible arrangementof particles, whether or not that arrangement would make there be atalking donkey. In fact, before he could finish with modality, he hadto complete a wholesale analysis of the global in terms of the local! Whyshould the analysis of modality have to wait on that? Surely it oughtto be possible to take 'talking donkey' and whatnot as primitive whenwe are analysing modality, whatever other project we might care toundertake on another day. That's how I do it: I say it's possible for thereto be a talking donkey iff some world has a talking donkey as part - noutopian analysis of 'talking donkey' in terms of arrangements of particlesis required.
I conclude that linguistic ersatzism must indeed take modality asprimitive. If its entire point were to afford an analysis of modality, thatwould be a fatal objection. But there are many theoretical services leftfor a version of ersatzism to render, even if it cannot analyse modalityaway. So it is open to an ersatzer to pay the price, accept modality asprimitive, and consider the proposal well worth it on balance. Manyersatzers, of various sorts, see the contest between genuine and ersatzmodal realism in just that way: there is a choice between unwelcomeontology and unwelcome primitive modality, and they prefer the latter.
That seems to me a fair response on their part, but of course notconclusive.
(Frank Jackson has suggested that resort to primitive modality, andthe circularity that would ensue if we went on to analyse modality in termsof ersatz worlds, is no price at all. 'Circularity is a crucial defect inexplicatory philosophical analyses. . . . But the situation is quite differentwith paraphrases directed to ontological questions.' If we take 'virtuous'as primitive in paraphrasing away a seeming reference to virtue, that 'isunacceptable as a final explication of virtue because it is circular, but

Linguistic Ersatzism157it does . . . show that we need not believe in the existence of an entitycalled "virtue"' CA Causal Theory of Counterfactuals', page 18). Right;
if our work is directed to ontological questions only, we may help ourselvesto any primitives we please, so long as we somehow understand them.
But if our work is directed to ontological questions and analytic questionsboth, as I think it usually is, then we are trying at once to cut down onquestionable ontology and to cut down on primitives, and it is fair toobject if one goal is served at too much cost to the other.)
My second objection concerns the descriptive power of the worldmakinglanguage. If it is a language that can be specified, complete withinterpretation, by a this-worldly theorist, then it must have limiteddescriptive resources; and then it cannot distinguish all the possibilitiesit should. Here I am no longer speaking of the shortfall of cardinality;
as we have seen, that can be set right by introducing infinite vocabularyor infinitary connectives. But two problems of descriptive power remain.
Each one divides into (what I take to be) a harmless part and a serious part.
First is a problem about indiscernibles. If ersatz possible worlds andindividuals are linguistic descriptions, then we will never have two of themexactly alike. If an ersatz possibility is its description, there can be onlyone for any given description. Our ersatz worlds and individuals will obeya principle of identity of indiscernibles. So if ever we ought to acknowledgea plurality of indiscernible possibilia, our linguistic ersatz possibilia willbe unsatisfactory. We will have to regard them as equivocal, asambiguously representing many different possibilities. But then thepossibilities of which there are many cannot be the linguistic descriptionsof which there is only one.
The problem of indiscernible possible worlds is the harmless part. Mymodal realism does not say whether or not there are indiscernible worlds;
and I can think of no very weighty reason in favour of one answer orthe other. No application of modal realism seems to require indiscernibleworlds, and none would be hindered by them. It is an eminently negotiablequestion. If linguistic ersatzism has no place for indiscernible worlds,
and is otherwise attractive, so be it.
The problem of indiscernible possible individuals, on the other hand,
is serious. Certainly it is at least possible that there should be manyindiscernible individuals - alike in their intrinsic natures, and in theirextrinsic properties as well. That would be so if there were two-way eternalrecurrence. Or it would be so if the universe consisted of a perfectcrystalline lattice, infinite in all directions. According to an ersatz worldthat represents such repetition in time or space, there are manyindiscernible individuals. But we do not have correspondingly manyindiscernible ersatz possible individuals, all actualised according to thisersatz world. One must do for all. What the ersatz world says, or implies,

158Paradise on the Cheap?
is that the one ersatz individual is actualised many times over. So wherewe ought to have many indiscernible possibilities for an individual, wehave only one. Imagine a full description of a world of eternal recurrence,
with a certain role - say, that of a conqueror rather like Napoleon - filledonce in every indiscernible epoch. There are infinitely many indescerniblepossibilities for filling the Napoleonic role in such a world. Or so it surelyseems. But no: there is only the one ersatz individual, only the one linguisticdescription of a filler of the role.
Is it so or not that there are many possibilities? Neither choice issatisfactory. Say yes, and the possibilities cannot be the ersatz individuals.
Then what else is there for them to be? Say no, and we lose what seemsto be a valid implication: if there is a possibility according to which thereare many different individuals, then there are many different possibleindividuals associated with that possibility.
You might say: 'if multiplicity is wanted, no sooner said than done -
let's make many ordered pairs, pairing the one linguistic ersatz individualwith each of the infinitely many integers.' But multiplicity was not allI wanted. This is an irrelevant multiplicity. We have the infinitely manynew representations, differing now by the integers built into them; andwe have the infinitely many indiscernible possibilities that ought to beacknowledged. But the many representations do not represent the manypossibilities unambiguously, one to one. Rather, each of the many newrepresentations is ambiguous over all the many possibilities, just as theone original representation was. Nothing has been gained.
The second problem of descriptive power is that if a worldmaking languageis specifiable by a this-worldly theorist, then it cannot be expected to havea rich enough vocabulary to describe and to distinguish all the differentpossibilities there are.8Part of this problem is well known. If we build ersatz worlds out ofactual things, linguistically or otherwise, how can we represent possibilitiesthat involve extra individuals? For linguistic ersatzism, this is a problemabout naming. If the extra individuals do not exist for us to name (orfor us to declare them to be names of themselves) how can we possiblyhave any names for them? And without names for the extra individuals,
how do we distinguish ersatz worlds that do not differ at all in what rolesare played - in what sort of individuals there are, with what properties,
how related - but differ only in which extra individuals occupy those roles?
I consider this to be the harmless part of the problem. It is a haecceitist'sproblem, and I reject haecceitism. I think any intuitions in its favour canbe met by other means. (See section 4.4.) I think we characterise a81-lere I am indebted to Lycan, 'The Trouble with Possible Worlds'; Skyrms,
`Tractarian Nominalism'; and especially Bricker, Worlds and Propositions, pages 189-94.

Linguistic Ersatzism159possibility quite well enough by describing what kinds of individuals thereare and how they are related. We omit no information if we fail to say,
by name, who is who. The information we could give only by namingunactualised extra individuals is no genuine information at all. If perimpossibile we had all the names, and could say by name who it is thatplays this role and who plays that, we would merely make distinctionswithout differences. What matters is that we give a description accordingto which such-and-such roles are filled.
It is otherwise for properties. Here, what correspond to haecceitisticdifferences are genuine differences in how things might be; for they aredifferences in what properties things might have. I complain that if weonly have words for the natural properties that are instantiated withinour actual world, then we are not in a position to describe completelyany possibility in which there are extra natural properties, alien to actuality.
It is reasonable to think there are some such possibilities; and I do notsee how we could have words for the alien properties they involve.
Therefore these possibilities cannot be identified with their linguisticdescriptions in any language that could be available to us. Our bestlinguistic ersatz worlds sometimes are incomplete, and conflate possibilitiesthat differ only in respect of their alien natural properties.
Think of an ersatzist philosopher who lives in a simpler world thanours. The protons and neutrons (if we may call them that) of his worldare indivisible particles. There are no quarks; and so the distinctiveproperties of quarks, their so-called flavours and colours, are notinstantiated by anything at all in his simpler world. Nor, let us suppose,
are these properties analysable in terms of properties and relations thatare instantiated in the simpler world. They are alien to that world.
Likewise, perhaps some properties instantiated within richer worlds thanours are alien to our world. Maybe there are some especially opulent worldsthat do have instances of all the natural properties there could possiblybe. (By the principle of recombination advanced in section 1.8, there aresuch worlds if, but only if, it is possible to have a spacetime big enoughto make room for instances of all the different natural properties fromall the worlds.) But those worlds are special, and we have no reason tothink we live in one of them. More likely we are in the same positionas the philosopher who lives in a simpler world than ours. Then if wefailed to acknowledge the possibility of alien natural properties, we wouldbe just as wrong as he would be. But that is exactly what will happenunder linguistic ersatzism. There is no way the theorist can specify hisworldmaking language so that it will have words - names or predicates -
for properties alien to his world. So any language he can specify will beinadequate to distinguish some of the possibilities there are.
The point is simplest if we believe in universals to which the perfectlynatural properties correspond, and we adopt the Lagadonian scheme and

160Paradise on the Cheap?
let each universal serve as a predicate for itself. If only the universalsthat appear in this world are available to serve as predicates, then plainlythere are no predicates for alien universals. But it doesn't help if we adoptsome other scheme of interpretation. It still seems clear that if we hadbeen in the position of the philosopher in the simpler world, we wouldhave had no way at all to name the quark flavours and colours. Andwe may very well be in a predicament parallel to his. It is at any ratea possible predicament - he is in it. It seems arbitrary and absurd to admitthat it is possible to be in such a predicament if you are a simple creaturewhose protons do not consist of quarks, and then to deny that it is possibleto be in a parallel predicament if you are one of the more complex creaturesthat we take ourselves to be.
Or so I think. Of course, I have explained the problem in modal realistterms: here are we, there are the alien natural properties (or universals)
only instantiated off in other worlds, and we have no way to introducewords for them. An ersatzer will not agree that there are any propertiesinstantiated off in other worlds, since he does not believe that there areany other worlds. Nevertheless he somehow understands modality; andI should hope he would find it compelling to say, simply, that there mighthave been other natural properties (or universals) than there are. If not,
I say that he gets the facts of modality wrong. And I hope he would agree,
also, that there is no way for us to introduce words for those propertiesthat there might have been, but actually are not.
Here I expect a protest. I have spoken indifferently of properties thatthere actually are, or of properties that are actually instantiated; and ofproperties that there only might have been, or of properties that onlymight have been instantiated. It is open to reply that the properties thereactually are go beyond the properties that are actually instantiated; andthat the properties that only might have been instantiated are neverthelessamong the properties that there are. The reply invokes uninstantiatedproperties: it claims that each and every property that might have beenactualised does exist, as part of (the abstract side of) actuality. Then bythe Lagadonian scheme, if not otherwise, we have a name for all the extraproperties that might have been instantiated but aren't. Ersatz worldsare to be constructed out of the resources of actuality, including theuninstantiated properties that actually exist.
(Such a position, minus my gloss on it as linguistic in a generalisedsense, would be one natural way to develop the rather noncommital`world-story' ersatzism of Robert M. Adams. His world-stories are setsof entities with quasi-syntactic structure. These entities sometimes haveindividuals, or else their `thisnesses', as constituents; so it seems thatproperties, in some sense, might well be wanted as further constituents.)
In reply, I must raise a question that I have been passing by: what doesthe ersatzer mean by 'property'? As I said in section 1.5, there are many

Linguistic Ersatzism161different conceptions of properties; and not all of these are availableto an ersatzer. He cannot mean what I mean: the set of all the instances,
at this world or any other. For a property uninstantiated at thisworld has no this-worldly instances; he doesn't believe in other-worldlyinstances; so the set is empty. But he does not wish to conflate allthe uninstantiated properties. Is a property, for him, some sort ofabstraction from a predicate? From a this-worldly predicate, it willhave to be; for he believes in no others. Then he will first have to findsome other way to introduce words for the alien properties, beforehe can name them by the Lagadonian method. Are his propertiesuniversals? Or sets of duplicates tropes? All very well for an elite minorityof instantiated properties, perhaps. But no good for uninstantiatedproperties - universals or tropes are supposed to be present in theirinstances, and there is nothing for uninstantiated ones to be presentin. Not, at any rate, here in what the ersatzer takes to be the one andonly world. (I have no parallel problem. Alien universals or tropes couldbe present in their other-worldly instances.) Is it that, althoughthe uninstantiated ones among his properties do not technically qualifyas universals or tropes, at any rate they are of a kind with the instantiateduniversals or tropes that really are present in things? But what does 'ofa kind' mean here? I don't suppose it is to be explained in terms of thesharing of second-order universals, or the exact duplication of second-
order tropes! I might perhaps take 'of a kind' as primitive, as an alternativeto believing in universals or tropes. But if you take it as primitive ontop of your universals or tropes, you're buying a dog and doing the barkingyourself. Are his properties the sort of magical entities that I shall discussin section 3.4? In that case it will be enough, for now, to say that heought not to believe in such things because there is no acceptable accountof how they do their stuff; but that if nevertheless he does believe in them,
he could make them serve the ersatzist cause more simply than as wordsin a Lagadonian language. So (with the magical properties left asunfinished business) I think my conclusion stands: neither the philosopherin the simpler world, nor we in ours, have any words for the missingproperties.
What we can do, however, is to speak of them by quantification. Theersatzer in the simple world can introduce a language in which he cansay, what is false in his world:
Protons are tripartite. And there are natural properties X, Y, Z, ofwhich each least part of a proton has exactly one, which enter as followsinto the laws of nature that govern the binding together of protonsand their least parts: - X - Y - Z -. And the properties X, Y, and Z aredifferent from charge, different from spin, . . . .

162Paradise on the Cheap?
where the dashed part is an open sentence in which the variables occurfree, and the dotted part is completed with difference clauses for all thenatural properties he is in a position to name. That is, he can introducea language in which to formulate existential quantifications overproperties. Such a quantification is false at his world, but it could bemade true by suitably behaved properties alien to his world; and, thanksto the last clause, it could be made true only by there being alien properties.
Such sentences can be members of, and true according to, his linguisticersatz worlds. Ramsey taught us to use existential quantifications overproperties to express the content of hypotheses about this world; and thesame method is available for use in describing unactualised possibilities.
The ersatzer in the simpler world can construct Ramsified ersatz worldswhich contain (or imply) existential quantifications that could be madetrue by there being alien natural properties, and only so.
And we can do the same. Some of our linguistic ersatz worlds shouldbe Ramsified; so that they say by quantification, if not by name, thatthere are extra nameless properties, alien to our world, which are haveinstances distributed in so-and-so way and which play such-and-suchnomological role. Then we have ersatz worlds according to which thereare extra, alien properties. Thereby we acknowledge the possibility. Whatmore could I ask?
Well, I could ask not only that possibilities not be omitted, but alsothat different possibilities not be conflated. When that unfortunatephilosopher in his simpler world constructs Ramsified ersatz worlds usingthe limited resources at his disposal, every world is at least partiallydescribed by one of them. But I say that the worlds with the alienproperties - I mean worlds with natural properties that are alien to him,
for instance our world - are described incompletely. He has said whatroles for properties are occupied, but he has not said - and he could notpossibly say - which properties occupy which roles. Here we are, withnames for properties that he cannot name. We can distinguish our worldfrom one in which, say, one of the quark colours has traded places withone of the flavours. The two possibilities are isomorphic, yet different.
There are more ways than one to make one of his Ramsey sentences, orone of his Ramsified ersatz worlds, come true. Therefore such an ersatzworld does not describe any of the relevant possibilities completely.
(Here I expect a rejoinder. Is it really possible that a quark colour anda flavour should trade places? Or do such properties as these have theirnomological roles or their causal powers essentially? If so, as has beensuggested by Shoemaker and by Swoyer, then a property with thenomological role of a certain quark colour would have to be that quarkcolour, and could not be one of the flavours instead. Then it may be,
after all, that the philosopher in the simpler world has the resources todescribe our world - or any world - completely; it is enough if he can

Linguistic Ersatzism163specify the relevant nomological roles. And if he has adequate resourcesto describe any world, so a fortiori do we. So my objection rests on denyingthe thesis of essential nomological roles. I support this denial by meansof the principle of recombination (see section 1.8). Start with a worldwhere the quark colours and flavours do figure in the laws that aresupposed to be essential to them. By patching together duplicates of thingsfrom that world, we can presumably describe a world where those lawsare broken; yet perfectly natural properties are intrinsic ex officio, andso they never can differ between duplicates. The principle of recombinationseems to me very compelling indeed; and it ought to be no less compellingwhen reformulated in ersatzist fashion. If an ersatzer answers me bysacrificing recombination so that nomological roles can be essential, Isay that he leaves the frying pan for the fire.)
In arguing that a Ramsified ersatz world made from the resources ofthe simple world can come true in more ways than one, I have again spokenas the modal realist that I am. But I have not been begging the questionagainst the linguistic ersatzer. He should agree with me that such an ersatzworld, though it is the very best that could be made by the philosopherin the simpler world, is incomplete. For it conflates possibilities that evenan ersatzer can distinguish, if he has the luck to live at this world. Itconflates different ones of the richer ersatz worlds that we can make,
therefore it is incomplete.
But how is it with one of the very best Ramsified ersatz worlds thatwe can make? Is this ersatz world complete? Is it so or not that thereare many possible ways for it to come true? Neither choice is satisfactory.
Say yes, and those many possibilities cannot be the one ersatz world thatstops with Ramsey sentences. Then what else is there for them to be?
Say no, and I ask what guarantees our luck? As before, there is a possiblepredicament - the philosopher in the simpler world is in it - in which someof one's very best Ramsified ersatz worlds will be incomplete. It seemsarbitrary and absurd to admit that it is possible to be in such a predicamentif you are a simple creature whose protons do not consist of quarks, andthen to deny that it is possible to be in a parallel predicament if you areone of the more complex creatures that we take ourselves to be.
You might say: 'if multiplicity is wanted, no sooner said than done -
let's make many ordered pairs, pairing the one Ramsified linguistic ersatzworld with each of the infinitely many integers.' But again, as in the caseof indiscernible possible individuals, multiplicity was not all I wanted.
This seems like an irrelevant multiplicity. We have the infinitely manynew representations, differing now by the integers built into them; andwe have the infinitely many possibilities, differing by permutations ofthe alien properties, that ought to be acknowledged. But the manyrepresentations do not represent the many possibilities unambiguously,
one to one. Rather, each of the many new representations is ambiguous

164Paradise on the Cheap?
over all the many possibilities, exactly as the one original representationwas. Nothing has been gained.
The ersatzer's problem is that he denied, quite implausibly, that thereare many ways that one of his Ramsified ersatz worlds could come true.
He might try to soften that denial as follows.
For each of my Ramsified ersatz worlds, there is only the one possibility;
because - say I, standing firm - the ersatz world is the possibility. SoI deny that there are many ways that such an ersatz world could cometrue. But I am willing to say, since I help myself to primitive modality -
I'd better! - that if my ersatz world did come true, then there wouldbe many ways for it to come true. For then there would be moreproperties to name, so there would be a richer worldmaking language,
so the missing distinctions could be provided. There is only the onepossibility, but there might have been the many.
I am not content. This sounds better than it is. It sounds as if he is meetingme half-way: when I demand many possibilities he does not offer me that,
but at least he offers me many possible possibilities. Then I could verywell say: call them what you will, at least we have many of something.
Not so. There is no such thing in his ontology as an unactualised possiblepossibility. He has gone no part of the way toward granting what I tookto be plainly true. I say there are many ways that something might havehappened. He denies that there are many of anything relevant, thoughhe grants that there might have been.
At least, I hope that is what he does. But he could turn very devious,
agreeing with me verbally while disagreeing in substance. He could say`there are many' and mean 'there might have been many'. Does the potcall the kettle black? No; when I say interchangeably 'there are manytalking donkeys - other-worldly ones' and 'there might have beenmany talking donkeys', that is because on my view the thing can be saideither way equivalently, without at all departing from the ordinaryquantificational meaning of 'there are many'. (Remember that part ofthe ordinary meaning of any idiom of quantification consists ofsusceptibility to restrictions; and that restrictions come and go with thepragmatic wind.) But if the ersatzer turns devious, his 'there are many'has come loose altogether from its ordinary quantificational meaning.
`There are many ways the Ramsified ersatz world could come true' couldmean what you please, for instance that God is great. But so long as itis meant quantificationally, the ersatzer hasn't any right to affirm it asI do. He would do better to bite the bullet: to say outright that, strangeas it may seem, each of our Ramsified ersatz worlds could come true inonly one way.
Skyrms is one philosopher who is prepared to bite the bullet. As I noted

Pictorial Ersatzism165above, his `Tractarian Nominalism' is linguistic ersatzism of theLagadonian sort. He stops short of declaring his allegiance to it, but hedoes consider it a 'live metaphysical option, and an attractive one'. Hesees that the position has the consequence that 'we think about possiblefacts and possible worlds in two quite different ways. For possible worldswhose objects and relations are subsets of this world our possibilities areessentially combinatorial. We rearrange some or all of our relationshipsbetween some or all of the objects to get our possibilities. . . .' But 'theremight be more, or other objects than there are. There might be otherforces in nature, other physical properties and relations. To cash theseintuitions we must think of possibilities analogically. In the analogicalphase . . . the game is quite different. . . . at this stage, haecceitism fails'
(for objects and relations alike) 'and a kind of Ramsey sentence .. .
approach to the "new" objects prevails' (`Tractarian Nominalism', pages201-2). Evidently Skyrms finds it acceptable that a Ramsey sentenceapproach should prevail, not only for the more or other objects - as tothat, I agree with him - but also for the other forces in nature, otherphysical properties and relations.
Linguistic representation gave us three problems, none of which arise formy genuine modal realism. (1) Some descriptions are inconsistent, so weneed resources to distinguish the consistent ones; whereas there is no suchthing as an inconsistent world. (2) We cannot have two indiscernibledescriptions; whereas maybe there are indiscernible worlds, and in anycase there certainly are indiscernible parts of worlds. (3) What can bedescribed is limited by what we can have words for; whereas worlds canoutrun our means of describing them. These three drawbacks of linguisticersatzism, taken together, seem to me to be rather more damaging thanthe incredulous stares that greet my own plurality of worlds. But if, fullyaware of its advantages and drawbacks, you judged linguistic ersatzismto be the better theory, that would not be contrary to reason. I take thisto be a question for weighing and balancing - not for knockdownrefutation.
It is otherwise with pictorial and magical ersatzism, to be consideredin the rest of this chapter. Those may seem to have advantages both overgenuine modal realism and over linguistic ersatzism, but I think their meritsare illusory and they are to be rejected. The best ersatzism by far islinguistic.
3.3 Pictorial ErsatzismIf the problems of linguistic representation do not arise for genuine modalrealism, then perhaps the ersatzer would be better served by ersatz worlds

166Paradise on the Cheap?
which are made more in the image of genuine worlds. Perhaps, apartfrom its abstractness, an ersatz world should be like a picture. Let it belike a picture in a generalised sense: a sense in which a statue counts asa three-dimensional picture, and a working model counts as a four-
dimensional picture. And let it be an idealised picture, infinite in extentand many-dimensional if need be, which represents the concrete worldin its entirety and in all its detail. We want no projection into too fewdimensions, no omission of hidden or minute parts, no spurious structurethat is in the picture but plays no part in the representing.
A picture represents by isomorphism. We have a cat on a mat, andwe have a picture of it. There is a part of the picture that correspondsto the cat; it is composed of parts that correspond in turn to parts ofthe cat: to the paws, the tail, the whiskers, . . . . This part of the pictureis mostly black, except for one white bit that corresponds to a bit of thecat's throat; therefore the picture represents the cat as being black exceptfor a white patch on the throat. The part of the picture that correspondsto the cat touches another part of the picture that corresponds to the mat;
therefore the picture represents the cat as being on the mat.
With our ordinary pictures, the isomorphism is limited. For instancethe part of the picture that corresponds to the cat is not furry; insteadit is streaky in a certain way, and that is how it represents the cat as furry.
Distances correspond not by identity but by a scaling factor: the partsof the picture are all closer together than the corresponding parts of thecat and mat. The opposite side of the cat, and its innards, are not picturedat all; no part of the picture is isomorphic to them; and yet the cat isrepresented as a proper complete cat, or at any rate is not representedas incomplete. Even with working models there are limits to isomorphism.
A model locomotive does not represent its prototype as being made ofplastic (with overscale atoms), or as having an electric motor in the boiler.
These practical limitations of isomorphism are patched over by meansof extensive and complicated conventional understandings; at this pointpictorial representation is language-like. We don't want that. We werelooking for an alternative to linguistic ersatz worlds, so let us havesomething as different as we can. Since we think of our new ersatz worldsas idealised pictures, we may safely suppose that they represent entirelyby isomorphism. The only remaining limits are those, if any, that areinescapable given our project of using abstract entities to picture concreteones.
Isomorphic representation, pure and simple, works by composition ofparts and by identity of properties and relations. So our pictorial ersatzworld must consist of parts, with diverse properties, arranged in a certainway. Thereby it represents the concrete world as isomorphic to it: asconsisting of corresponding parts, with the same properties, arranged inthe same way. One ersatz world pictures the concrete world correctly.

Pictorial Ersatzism167(One only, unless there is duplication among the ersatz worlds.) In thecase of that ersatz world, the abstract picture and the concrete world reallyare isomorphic. Any other ersatz world pictures the concrete worldincorrectly. It misrepresents the world as isomorphic to it, but in factthe concrete world is not isomorphic to it, and nothing else - or nothingan ersatzer would believe in - is either. The ersatz world that pictures theconcrete world correctly is the actualised ersatz world. Any other couldhave been actualised instead: had the concrete world been different inthe arrangement and properties of its parts, it would thereby have beenisomorphic to a different ersatz world.
Just as one part of the picture of the cat on the mat is isomorphic (withinlimits) to the cat, and smaller parts are isomorphic to parts of the cat,
so the parts of the actualised ersatz world are isomorphic to parts of theconcrete world. Some parts of some other ersatz worlds also areisomorphic to parts of the concrete world - the misrepresentation in thoseersatz worlds lies elsewhere. Other parts of ersatz worlds are notisomorphic to anything there is, but they would have been had thingsbeen different. Just as the parts of genuine possible worlds are the possibleindividuals, so the parts of pictorial ersatz worlds are the ersatz possibleindividuals. And when an entire ersatz world is isomorphic to the concreteworld, and thereby is actualised as a whole, then also the various ersatzindividuals that are part of that ersatz world are actualised by theirrespective concrete isomorphs.
The big advantage of pictorial over linguistic ersatzism is that there isno problem about possibilities that involve alien natural properties. Justas I say that alien properties are instantiated by parts of other worlds,
so the pictorial ersatzer can say that they are instantiated by parts of hisabstract pictures. He can have his alien ersatz worlds, full of ersatzindividuals instantiating diverse alien natural properties beyond the reachof our thought and language. Unlike the linguistic ersatzer, he neitheromits nor conflates these possibilities.
However, I have three objections. The first and second resembleobjections to linguistic ersatzism, but in both cases the problems arisein a changed form. The third is new, and I think is the most serious.
The first is that we still need primitive modality. Not, as before, inorder to require consistency when we select the ersatz worlds out of awider class of candidates; we have indeed bypassed that problem. Pictorialersatzism, like genuine modal realism and unlike linguistic ersatzism,
needn't filter out inconsistent candidates, because there aren't any in thefirst place. For instance, we noticed that it is all too easy to say that thesame particle is both positive and negative in charge. But if in fact theseare incompatible determinates, whether or not we have any way to knowit, then nothing whatever - be it a concrete particle or be it part of an

168Paradise on the Cheap?
abstract picture - has them both. And if the way to represent that a particleis both positive and negative is for part of a picture also to be both positiveand negative, we can rest assured that coexistence of charges will bepictured only if it is indeed possible.
I know there are so-called 'inconsistent pictures', mostly by Escher.
But what makes their inconsistency possible is that the representation isnot perfectly pictorial. It isn't all done by isomorphism; for instance,
there are conventions of perspective to be abused. But the more is doneby isomorphism, the less opportunity there is for any inconsistency - cana statue be inconsistent? And our pictorial ersatz worlds areuncompromisingly pictorial. It is all done by isomorphism.
Implicit representation, on the other hand, is still with us and still createsa need for primitive modality. An analysis of modality in pictorial ersatzistterms would be circular. To see why, let us try to analyse the modalstatement that there might be a talking donkey. That is so iff there issome ersatz world according to which there is a talking donkey. Suchan ersatz world is one that has a part - an ersatz possible individual - whichis an ersatz talking donkey. But what does it mean to call something anersatz talking donkey? After all, it is not isomorphic to any talking donkey,
because there is no talking donkey for it to be isomorphic to. At anyrate, there is none within the one and only concrete world the ersatzerbelieves in. The picture represents falsely; the ersatz talking donkey, andlikewise the ersatz world it is part of, are unactualised. What makes thething an ersatz talking donkey is just that it could have been isomorphicto a talking donkey that was part of the concrete world, and it wouldhave been if the concrete world had been different, and it couldn't havebeen isomorphic to any part of the concrete world that was not a talkingdonkey.
In short, there might be a talking donkey iff there might be a talkingdonkey isomorphic to some part of some ersatz world. That is no advancetoward an analysis of the modal statement we began with.
If an ersatz talking donkey were literally a talking donkey, we wouldhave no problem. (That is why there is no parallel problem for me: Isay that an other-worldly talking donkey is literally a talking donkey.)
But that, I take it, is not to be said. The sharing of properties acrossthe divide between concrete and abstract must have its limits. Concretenessand abstractness themselves obviously cannot be properties shared acrossthe divide. And neither can donkeyhood. Whatever 'concrete' may mean,
at least one thing is certain: a donkey is the very sort of thing that isparadigmatically concrete. Therefore an abstract ersatz donkey, talkingor not, is no donkey. In the properties and arrangement of its parts, allbut those properties that cannot be shared across the divide, it is justlike a donkey. It is like a donkey except for being abstract rather thanconcrete. But that is a treacherous way to put it. To say that something

Pictorial Ersatzism169is 'like a donkey' is not to say that there is any donkey it is like. In thiscase there is not, or so the ersatzer supposes. Our ersatz donkey is unlikeany donkey there is, even apart from its lack of concreteness. For nodonkey talks. Only in the modal sense is it donkey-like: it is like donkeysthat might be, not donkeys that are.
(We might do a bit better with simpler things. Suppose we had askedwhat an abstract ersatz proton is. The answer 'something just like a protonexcept that it isn't concrete' need not be taken in the unhelpful modalsense. Unlike donkeys, protons have little scope for differing one fromanother. So we might well accept not only that any ersatz proton is proton-
like, but also that there is some proton that it is like. That is not beyonddispute - is it too essentialist about proton-kind? - but if it is not yet rightfor protons, it might be right for still simpler things, spacetime pointsperhaps. Then we can go further: for we have structural definitions ofkinds of atoms in terms of subatomic particles, kinds of molecules interms of atoms, and so on. (Sometimes these definitions are disjunctive,
as when there are isotopes of an element or isomers of a compound.)
So I will grant that we can say what it is to be an ersatz paradichloro-
benzene molecule. It won't matter if there are no concrete paradichloro-
benzene molecules for an ersatz one to be isomorphic to: we characterisethe ersatz molecules not by their isomorphism to the concrete, but bytheir structural definition in terms of ersatz things - ersatz protons, andthe like - that we can characterise by isomorphism to the concrete. Butat some point the method gives out: what is the structural definition ofa talking donkey? If we have to know that before we can analyse thestatement that there might have been a talking donkey, and likewise forthe statement that there might have been a philosophising cat, or a laughingcow, the analysis of modality will long remain unfinished.)
Extending our earlier contrast of explicit and implicit representation,
we can say that a pictorial ersatz world represents explicitly that theconcrete world consists of parts arranged in a certain way and with certainproperties. The properties here are limited to those that can be sharedacross the divide, therefore we can have no explicit representation thatthere are donkeys or protons or puddles or stars - not if such thingsare paradigmatically concrete. (Thus the representation just envisagedof a proton or a paradichlorobenzene molecule, though perhapsunproblematic, does not count as explicit.) And an ersatz world representsimplicitly all that is implied by what it represents explicitly. The implicationis modal: we have implicit representation that there is a talking donkeybecause, necessarily, if the properties and arrangement of the parts ofthe concrete world are as they are explicitly represented to be, then theremust be a talking donkey. Indeed, whenever it is represented that thereare concrete things of such and such kind, or instances of properties notshared across the divide, the representation must be implicit.

170Paradise on the Cheap?
(Another sort of implicit representation, noted in the linguistic case,
is still with us: representation by an ersatz world that it is the actualisedone. To make this representation explicit we would have to let each ersatzworld picture not only the concrete world but also the entire system ofersatz worlds, including itself. This would make the ersatz worldsenormously complex. And worse, if the ersatz worlds picture one anotherpicturing one another . . . , that would mean that each ersatz world hasmany different parts which could be isormorphic to the concrete world.
Then what distinguishes the part that is supposed to be the picture ofthe concrete world from all the parts that are parts of the pictures ofvarious ersatz worlds?)
This is very like the problem that arose for linguistic ersatzism if wechose an impoverished worldmaking language, capable of describing localbut not global matters. We need primitive modality to get from whatis explicitly represented to what is implied about, as it might be, whetherthere is a talking donkey. So we might look in the same direction fora remedy: introduce a language for which implication can be defined indeductive, purely syntactic terms. (Not the worldmaking language, sincewe no longer have one.) As part of that definition, it will be necessaryto specify a list of axioms. Again, I do not think that can be done withoutcovertly relying on primitive modality. We will need conditional axiomsto the effect that if - here follows a very long, perhaps infinite, descriptionin terms of properties that can be shared across the divide - then thereis a talking donkey. Again, it would be impossible in practice to give theaxioms, so no pictorial ersatzer can complete his theory. (And even if,
per impossibile, the job could be done, I would still find it very peculiarif it turned out that before we can finish analysing modality, we haveto analyse talking-donkeyhood as well!) Unless, of course, he does theobvious thing: declares that among conditionals of the proper form,
exactly those shall be axioms that are necessarily true.
My second objection is that we still have a problem of conflation ofindiscernible possibilities, though it takes a new form. For pictorial, asopposed to linguistic, ersatzism, possibilities certainly do not obey anyprinciple of identity of indiscernibles. There might be indiscernible ersatzworlds; and there certainly will be indiscernible ersatz individuals. Anersatz world according to which there is two-way eternal recurrence willconsist of many indiscernible ersatz epochs, and within these will be foundindiscernible ersatz Napoleonic conquerors. The problem is with theactualisation of indiscernible possibilities. If one ersatz world is isomorphicto the concrete world, then so is any other that is indiscernible from it;
whereas it ought to be that one and only one ersatz world is actualised.
Likewise, more seriously, for indiscernible ersatz individuals. Supposethe concrete world undergoes eternal recurrence, with a Napoleonic

Pictorial Ersatzism171conqueror in every epoch. Consider one of these conquerors: Napoleonhimself. He is isomorphic to all those indiscernible ersatz individuals.
So we have plenty of indiscernible possibilities for him, as we should;
but instead of actualising one of them, he actualises them all! That isnot right. Should we therefore take possibilities to be not the ersatz worldsand individuals themselves, but equivalence classes of them underindiscernibility? No, that gives back unique actualisation at the cost ofconflating the indiscernible possibilities. I have no corresponding problem:
isomorphism doesn't distinguish indiscernibles but identity does. If thisis a world of eternal recurrence, Napoleon actualises only one of theindiscernible possible individuals: himself.
My third, and most serious, objection is that pictorial ersatzism does notreally get rid of unwelcome ontology. Its 'abstract' ersatz worlds andindividuals are not abstract in any customary sense of the word, or inany sense that makes them easier to believe in than my 'concrete' possibilia.
In section 1.7, I complained that the supposed distinction betweenabstract and concrete is in disarray. I listed four ways of trying to explainit, and I complained that these ways disagreed with one another. Let usreview them to see if we can find any useful sense in which a pictorialersatz world might be 'abstract'.
First we had the Way of Example: concrete entities are things likedonkeys and puddles and protons and stars, whereas abstract entities arethings like numbers. This Way is unhelpful if we are told that pictorialersatz donkeys are quite donkey-like in the arrangement and propertiesof their parts, but nevertheless are abstract.
Second was the Way of Conflation: the distinction between concreteand abstract entities is just the distinction between individuals and sets,
or between particulars and universals, or perhaps between particularindividuals and anything else. This Way is useless: pictorial ersatz worldshave to be particular individuals, but abstract even so. For if they areto be fit for their work, they must be composed of parts capable ofextensive sharing of properties and of relations with the particularindividuals that are parts of the concrete world. But - aside from hoked-
up disjunctive and extrinsic classifications - there seem to be few sharedproperties of universals and particulars, or of sets and individuals. Soersatz worlds had better be composed of particulars rather than universals,
and individuals rather than sets. (I do not rule out that some parts ofthe ersatz world, and of the concrete world as well, might be universals.
But if so, both the ersatz and the concrete worlds would nevertheless divideexhaustively into particulars, since the universals would be parts of theparticulars that instantiate them.) And if so, then the ersatz worlds mustthemselves be particular individuals. For a universal cannot be composedof particular parts: universals recur, particulars don't, but if the whole

172Paradise on the Cheap?
recurs then so do its parts, for the parts must be present wherever thewhole is. And a set cannot be composed mereologically out of individualparts. For two things can never be composed of exactly the same parts -
that is the difference between mereological composition and the generatingof sets - and there is already an individual composed of those parts.
Mereology does apply to sets, I think; but we have to take the parts ofa set to be its subsets, rather than any individuals.
Third was the Negative Way: abstract entities have no spatiotemporallocation; they do not enter into causal interaction; they are neverindiscernible one from another. Since our abstract ersatz worlds aresupposed to represent pictorially, by means of the properties andarrangement of their parts, it seems that their parts must enter intospatiotemporal relations. Perhaps they stand in no spatiotemporal relationsto us; but if so, then equally we stand in no spatiotemporal relations tothem, and that doesn't make us abstract. (The difference between abstractand concrete is supposed to be a difference in kind, so not a relativematter.) Likewise for causal interaction: the parts of ersatz worlds donot enter into causal interaction with us, but they seem to enter into causalinteraction with one another. Or at least into something just like causalinteraction: it would be covered by a counterfactual analysis of causation,
with the counterfactuals in turn explained in terms of closeness of ersatzworlds. Perhaps we might insist on denying that parts of ersatz worldsare located, or enter into causal interaction, for the very reason that theyare not concrete; but only if we had some independent reason why they,
are not. As for indiscernibility: an ersatz world that pictures two-wayeternal recurrence will have indiscernible parts. So on all three counts,
pictorial ersatz worlds consist of parts which the Negative Way cannotclassify as abstract. Therefore the Negative Way does not support anycontention that the ersatz worlds themselves are abstract.
Fourth was the Way of Abstraction: abstract entities are abstractionsfrom concrete entities. They result from somehow subtracting specificity,
so that an incomplete description of the original concrete entity becomesa complete description of the abstraction. But our pictorial ersatz worldsand individuals do not seem to be at all lacking in specific detail. Maybeyou could say that the actualised ersatz world is somehow an abstractionfrom the concrete world; though it doesn't seem to be specificity thathas been subtracted. But how about the unactualised ersatz worlds? Arethey somehow abstractions from other concrete worlds? - No, becauseaccording to the ersatzer there aren't any other concrete worlds for themto be abstractions from.
Still, I think the Way of Abstraction affords our only hope of finding asense in which the pictorial ersatz worlds and their parts are 'abstract'. Thebest sense I can make of that claim is as follows. First, some of them areliterally abstractions. There is a special ingredient of the concrete world -

Pictorial Ersatzism173vim, I shall call it - which is entirely absent from all the ersatz worlds andtheir parts. The actualised ersatz world is just like the concrete world withits vim left out, so in that sense it is an abstraction. Likewise any ersatzindividual that is isomorphic to part of the concrete world is a vimlessabstraction. Second, the rest of the ersatz worlds and individuals are notliterally abstractions. There is nothing they are abstractions from. Wenevertheless call them abstract because, like the ones that literally are abstrac-
tions, they are devoid of vim. Being vimless makes them abstraction-like.
(Genuine abstractions, we recall, might well be treated as innocent verbalfictions: to speak of the abstraction, economic man, is really just to speakin an abstract way of ordinary men. No hope for such a strategem inthe present case. Not for the abstraction-like entities which are not genuineabstractions: we cannot really be talking about the things whence theywere abstracted if there are no such things. And not even for the genuineabstractions that the others are supposed to be like: to make those thingsabstraction-like, we need genuine abstractions for them to be like. Non-
abstractions spoken of in an abstract way - ordinary men, for instance -
would not make things of a kind with them be abstraction-like.)
You may be tempted to give vim a different name. Should you callit 'concreteness'? No; for when unactualised ersatz worlds lack vim, theyare not genuine abstractions, merely abstraction-like. (And perhaps somethings with vim are genuine abstractions. Why not abstract from theconcrete world by leaving out not its vim but something else?) Shouldyou call it 'actualisation'? No; ex hypothesi it is missing even from theactualised ersatz world. Should you call it 'existence'? No; the abstractersatz realm, however lacking in vim, nevertheless exists.
The concrete world and the pictorial ersatz worlds alike are highlycomplex particular individuals. One of these individuals is the one weourselves are part of. And one of them is distinguished because it hasvim, and for that reason - for that reason only, so it seems - is called`concrete'. Why should we think we are part of the one with vim? Howcould we tell and why should we care? Ex hypothesi, we could haveotherwise the same properties, and the parts of ourselves and oursurroundings could be arranged alike, whether we had vim or not.
Almost, we have made our way back to genuine modal realism. Tothe extent that pictorial ersatzism is different, its differences are notto its credit. Its ontology is no more commonsensical than my own: itis just the same except for the vim, that mystery ingredient added toone world. Maybe the addition of vim does give us a sense in which wecan say that there is only one concrete world - we can only hope weare part of it! - but any connection with our reasons for wanting to sayso are long gone. The ersatz worlds are not sets or universals, 'abstract'entities that we might believe in already. The parts of what we are askedto believe in are donkeys, puddles, protons, stars, or what have you, in

174Paradise on the Cheap?
all but name. And the reason for withholding the names is flimsy in theextreme.
Pictures represent by having a lot in common with what they represent.
Our problem is that they have altogether too much in common. Pictorialersatzism is to be rejected.
3.4 Magical ErsatzismFor linguistic and pictorial ersatzism alike, there is supposed to be anaccount of how representation works. This account relies on the structure,
set-theoretic or mereological, of the ersatz world. What is true accordingto it depends on what is true of it; and what is true of it is, mainly,
that it is built up in a certain way from constituents of certain kinds.
The same could be said of the representation in my genuine modal realism:
it is true according to another world that there is a talking donkeybecause it is true of that world that it has a talking donkey as one ofits parts.
When we insisted on giving some structural account of representation,
it seemed that we faced a choice of evils: insufficient power to represent,
or else sufficient power by means of unwelcome ontology. Perhaps thatshould teach us not to pursue structural accounts of representation.
Perhaps we need some wholly different account of representation, or noaccount at all.
Let us suppose, then, that ersatz worlds have no relevant inner structure.
We may as well suppose they have no structure at all. They are not sets,
so they have no members. They are mereologically atomic, so they haveno proper parts. They are simples.
And they are abstract simples. In what way 'abstract'? - Presumablythe Negative Way. For ex hypothesi they are not sets, in particular notequivalence classes. Nor are they to be understood as non-spatiotemporalparts - universals or tropes - of the particles or donkeys or whatnot thatare parts of the concrete world; because surely there are not enough ofthose to supply as many ersatz worlds as we need. But the ersatz worldsare not sui generis among abstract entities; they are distinguished membersof a broader class of abstract simples. You might prefer to give thesesimples some tendentious name, but I shall call them simply elements.
There is an important distinction among the elements. Again I wanta neutral word for it; so I shall just say that some of them are selected,
others are not. Which ones are selected depends on what goes on withinthe concrete world. For instance, there are some elements that cannotbe selected unless there is a talking donkey included as a part within theconcrete world. And there is one element such that, necessarily, it is selectedif and only if there is a talking donkey. Since the selection of elements

Magical Ersatzism175depends on the concrete world, we may take it as a binary relation thatthe concrete world bears to whichever elements it selects.
It may happen that, necessarily, if the concrete world selects elementE, then also it selects element F; if so, let us say that E implies F.
We assume that this relation of implication between the elementssatisfies various formal principles: suffice it to say that the elements, takenunder implication, comprise a complete, atomic Boolean algebra. Inthis Boolean algebra, there are many elements, called maximal, that arenot implied by other elements (except that there is one special 'null'element that implies every element, even the maximal ones). We couldcall two elements incompatible iff they cannot both be selected; thena maximal element is incompatible with exactly those elements that it doesnot imply (and is not null), and this is an alternative way to characterisethe maximal elements. Necessarily, no matter what goes on withinthe concrete world, one and only one of the maximal elements will beselected. Then the selected elements will be exactly those which the selectedmaximal element implies. Since every (non-null) element is implied byat least one maximal element, it is possible for any (non-null) elementto be selected.
(A more complicated version of the theory, considered by Bricker, mightpermit there to be clusters of two or more elements, within which all theelements imply one another; we get a Boolean algebra only when we throwout all but any one element from each cluster. For simplicity, I will supposewe have no such clusters, so we have a Boolean algebra already.)
An element E represents that so-and-so, or it is the case that so-and-soaccording to E, iff, necessarily, if E is selected, then so-and-so. This ishow maximal elements, in particular, represent. The maximal elementsare the ersatz worlds. End of theory.
Suppose that an ersatzer presented his theory to me just like that. Someforseeable and indecisive skirmishing would ensue. Let us hasten throughit.
Say I: this is no theory. This is a theory-schema, which any numberof different theories could fit. Even my own: maybe the elements arethe sets of worlds, the concrete world - or any concrete world - selectsjust those elements that have it as a member, and it is the case accordingto an element that a donkey talks iff each world in that element has atalking donkey as a part. Equally, any sort of linguistic or pictorialersatzism could fit your schema.
Says he: not so. You have paid attention to the positive side of mytheory and overlooked my denials. I deny that the elements are concrete.
I deny that they have structure. I deny that they have parts or members.
That rules out the interpretations you mentioned. (Fair enough. But hadhis denials been left out, my point would have been well taken.)

176Paradise on the Cheap?
Say I: you make a great mystery, because you tell me nothing at allabout the nature of the elements.
Says he: I told you that they are abstract and they are simple. That wasnot what you wanted to hear. You wanted to be told that they had somesort of complex structure, as if they were linguistic descriptions or pictures.
I deny that they have any such structure. Why is my denial any less informa-
tive than some positive story about their structure would have been?
Say I: you make a second mystery, because you don't tell me whatit is for the concrete world to 'select' an element.
Says he: that's primitive. All theories have their primitives, and 'selects'and 'elements' are mine.
Say I: you cannot explain modality, because you took that as primitivealso.
Says he: I did. I don't pretend to explain modality, but there are plentyof other purposes for the theory to serve. (Fair enough.) The choice isbetween primitive modality and crazy ontology like yours, and I choosethe former.
Say I: what's so sane about your ontology? You multiply entities atleast as much as I do.
Says he: your ontology flies in the face of common sense, mine doesn't.
You require a lot of extra donkeys, and so forth; everybody knows whatthat means, and nobody believes it. I require a lot of abstract simples;
common sense has no opinion about them one way or the other.
Say I: you're taking refuge in your denials. If you'd come clean andsay something positive about the nature of your abstract simples, thenwe'd see what common sense might have to say about them.
Says he: there's nothing positive I could say that would be true.
So far, a deadlock. But I think I can advance my case by asking himto tell me something more about the primitive apparatus of his theory.
In particular, I want to know more about the relation whereby the concreteworld 'selects' some elements, maximal and otherwise. I ask: is selectionan internal relation or an external relation? That is: is it determined bythe two intrinsic natures of its two relata? Or is it determined not bythe intrinsic natures of the relata taken separately, but only by the intrinsicnature of the composite of both of them: element plus concrete world?
It would be unfair asking the ersatzer to define his primitive. But Iam not demanding definition, only classification. Compare my own case.
I might well take predicates of distance as primitive; but primitive or no,
I would say that distances are external relations par excellence. I mightwell take some sort of similarity relation as primitive;9 but primitive or9As in the 'adequate nominalism' considered as one option in my 'New Work for aTheory of Universals', pages 347-8.

Magical Ersatzism177no, any sort of similarity is an internal relation. I can fairly ask the ersatzerto classify his primitive in the same way.
Suppose first that the relation of selection is internal: when the concreteworld selects an element, that is so in virtue of what goes on within theconcrete world together with the intrinsic nature of the selected element.
If part of what goes on within the concrete world is that there is a talkingdonkey, that will mean that elements with some intrinsic natures will beselected and elements with others will not be. There is one element which,
in virtue of its distinctive intrinsic nature, necessarily will be selected ifand only if there is a talking donkey within the concrete world. Selectionmay remain unanalysed, but we have at least a schema that gives the formof an analysis. Element E is selected iffF1 (E) and P1 or F2(E) and P2 or .. .
where the Fs have to do with the intrinsic natures of the elements andthe Ps have to do with goings-on within the concrete world. If we arenot in a position to spell out the analysis, that is because our languagelacks some of the requisite Fs and Ps, or because there are infinitely manydisjuncts, or both.
Now we know more about the elements. They are not all alike; theydiffer one from another. In fact, there is a great deal of difference amongthem. The intrinsic natures available to them must be rich enough to permitenormous variation. For there must be enough elements, all with differentdistinctive natures, to provide a sufficient plenitude of possibilities. Nowit is fair to renew my request to be told something about what the elementsare like, and how they differ one from another. What are the propertiesin virtue of which one or another of them is selected?
Suppose the ersatzer replies to me: their intrinsic properties arerepresentational properties. For instance, some elements have the property:
representing that a donkey talks, or in other words, being an elementaccording to which a donkey talks. It is in virtue of these representationalproperties that some elements are selected and some are not. For instance,
there is one element that has the aforementioned property of representingthat a donkey talks, and no other representational properties. Necessarily,
that one is selected iff a donkey talks. Thus one of the disjuncts in theanalysis-schema shown above is:
Fi (E) and Piwhere Fj is 'represents that a donkey talks' and Pi is 'a donkey talks'.
And so it goes in general, for a great many corresponding Fs and Ps.
However, it isn't always this easy. Sometimes the distinctiverepresentational property of an element will have no finite expression in

178Paradise on the Cheap?
ordinary English; and sometimes - in cases involving nameless alien naturalproperties, for example - it cannot be expressed, not even infinitarily, forlack of vocabulary. So we haven't any general analysis of how it is thatthe concrete world selects certain elements. But at least we haveillustrations; so we should now understand what sort of properties areinvolved, and how it is that the concrete world selects elements in virtueof their representational properties.
No. All this helps us not at all. We have danced around a tiny circle.
There is an element such that, necessarily, it is selected iff a donkey talks;
that element has some distinctive intrinsic property; that property is named`representing that a donkey talks'; the property with that name singles outthe element that, necessarily, is selected iff a donkey talks. Not a thinghas been said about what sort of property that might be; still less, aboutwhich property of the appropriate sort it might be. The property that playsthe role is: the property that plays the role. It is no use telling me by namewhat property it is, if it bears that name exactly because it plays that role.
The names may give the impression that we know what we are talkingabout, but the impression is bogus. We have not the slightest idea whatthe 'representational properties' are; except that they are propertieswhereby a vast flock of abstract simples differ one from another. Equally,
we have not the slightest idea what the primitive internal relation ofselection is. Never mind a general understanding; we haven't even onesimple illustration of how the concrete world might select some elementin virtue of its intrinsic nature. Because the most we can ever say aboutthe nature of the element is: it is of a nature to be selected iff . . . .
Bring on the 'representational properties' by name, and we mightsuppose that they are on a par with other properties that we have namedby acquaintance with their instances. It is not so. We cannot have namedthem by acquaintance with the instances that now concern us: the abstractsimple elements. The elements are abstract in the sense of the NegativeWay, so we have no causal acquaintance with them whatsoever. Can itbe that the 'representational properties' are instantiated also by parts ofthe concrete world, so that we could have named them by acquaintancewith their concrete instances? There are not very many candidates, sincethey must be properties capable of being instantiated by simples. Propertiesof charge, mass, quark colour and flavour, and the like might perhapsdo. (If somehow they could be shared by abstract simples. But I don'tsee why they couldn't be.) But there are not nearly enough of thoseproperties to make all the differences we need. So at least the greatmajority of the 'representational properties' must lie entirely outside ouracquaintance. Then it is a mystery how anyone could have understoodthe predicate 'selects', which is supposed to express an internal relationthat involves these properties. If the ersatzer has understood his ownprimitive, he must have done it by magic.

Magical Ersatzism179Our isolation from the 'representational properties', on this view,
resembles our isolation from the other-worldly alien natural propertieson my own view. So I willingly grant that some properties lie beyondthe reach of our thought and language. And I willingly grant that thereare various internal relations which hold in virtue of such properties, andwhich therefore also lie beyond the reach of our thought and language.
What will not do is the pretence that we have somehow reached theunreachable, and got hold of a word for a specific one of the internalrelations that lie beyond our reach.
So perhaps it would be better to suppose that the relation of selectionis not internal but external. When the concrete world selects some of theabstract elements, that is not in virtue of the distinctive intrinsic naturesof the selected elements. Selection is like a distance relation betweenspacetime points: when one point is a mile or a year away from another,
that is not at all because of the distinctive natures of the two related points.
Indeed the points may well all be exactly alike. If they are distinct fromthe point-sized bits of matter or fields that occupy them, then they haven'tmuch intrinsic nature at all. Likewise if selection is an external relation,
we can do away with all mystery about the distinctive natures of theelements. We may as well suppose that the elements are all exactly alike;
they are as uniform and impoverished in intrinsic nature as the pointsare. Then it becomes fair once again for the ersatzer to offer us nothingbut denials when we ask him what the elements are like. The name of`elements' becomes more appropriate than before: all there is to themis their place in a relational system.1°
My problem this time is not with the elements, but with the supposedexternal relation of selection. For one thing, I wonder as before how anersatzer could possibly understand his own primitive. So far as we are told,
selection is not any external relation that is ever instantiated entirely withinthe concrete world; whenever it is instantiated, one term of the relationshipis abstract in the sense of the Negative Way, causally isolated from us, andtherefore beyond our acquaintance. I wonder how such a relation evercan come within the reach of our thought and language. But I will notpress this objection. There is another that seems even more serious.
My main objection is that selection is not any ordinary external relation;
it is a modal relation. I have been tolerant - maybe too much so - towardprimitive modality; but here, the primitive modality is especiallyrepugnant.
10I take it we would then have a case of 'constitutive relations', as denounced by JohnAnderson. It does seem very peculiar that there should be a relational system of thingswith no intrinsic natures to speak of. But I see no decisive objection. Besides, I fear wemay have the spacetime points as a precedent.

180Paradise on the Cheap?
The concrete world selects various elements. We are now supposingthat this selection has nothing to do with the distinctive natures of theselected elements - they haven't any - but it still has to do with what goeson in the concrete world. Necessarily, if a donkey talks, then the concreteworld selects these elements; if a cat philosophises, it selects those; andso on. I ask: how can these connections be necessary? It seems to be onefact that somewhere within the concrete world, a donkey talks; and anentirely independent fact that the concrete world enters into a certainexternal relation with this element and not with that. What stops it fromgoing the other way? Why can't anything coexist with anything here: anypattern of goings-on within the concrete world, and any pattern of externalrelations of the concrete world to the abstract simples?
What makes a relation external, I would have thought, exactly isthat it holds independently of the natures of the two relata. We wantedthe relation to be independent of the intrinsic nature of the elements,
because - once we see past the empty words - those alleged naturesturn out to be an utter mystery. But now we want the relation notto be independent of what goes on within the concrete world. How canwe have it both ways?
Suppose someone told us that in outer space there are many very specialparticles. They surround the earth in a certain spatial arrangement: theyare at various distances from the earth and from one another. Theirarrangement corresponds, of necessity, to what goes on here on earth.
For instance there are some of them such that, if a donkey talks somewhereon earth, they spell out the word 'yes% if not, they spell out the word`no'. It's not that this correspondence between heavenly and earthly affairsis ordained by the laws of nature, which are, after all, contingent. No:
it is absolutely necessary. In no sense at all is it possible that thearrangement of the particles might fail to be thus correlated with thevicissitudes of earthly affairs. The connections between heavenly andearthly affairs thus obtain by more than merely natural necessity. Theyare supernatural.
I would not believe such a tale for a moment, and I hope you wouldn'teither. If we know anything at all about what's possible, we know thatthe spatiotemporal relations of the extraterrestrial particles to the earthand to one another can vary quite independently of whether there aretalking donkeys here below. Supernatural necessary connections betweenthe one thing and the other are flatly impossible. But the tale of an externalrelation of selection is no better. The extraterrestrial particles have beenreplaced by abstract simples altogether outside of space and time; theearth has been replaced by the concrete world in its entirety; and thefamiliar external relations of distance have been replaced by the supposedexternal relation of selection. None of these changes help. All they dois kick up dust: no worries, it's all abstract!

Magical Ersatzism181I would like to complain, in Humean fashion, about necessaryconnections between distinct existences. But it's not quite that simple.
After all, the concrete world that may or may not have a talking donkeyas part is the same thing as the concrete world that may or may not selecta certain element. Nevertheless, I take it that we are dealing with somethingakin to our Humean principle of recombination (see section 1.8) whichrequires that anything can coexist with anything, and which therebyprohibits a necessary connection between the intrinsic character of a thingand the intrinsic character of distinct things with which it coexists. Weequally need a companion principle which prohibits a necessary connectionbetween the intrinsic character of a thing and its external relations to otherthings. It cannot be, for instance, that there is an absolutely necessaryconnection (as opposed to a contingent law of nature) whereby everycharged particle must be exactly a certain distance from another particle.
It's one thing for the particle to be charged, another thing for two particlesto be at a certain distance - the common involvement of the same particleis not enough to make the alleged connection intelligible.
So long as we know of no external relations except the (strictly oranalogically) spatiotemporal ones, it would be good enough to stick tothe special case. We can just require that spatiotemporal arrangementmay vary independently of the intrinsic nature of the things arranged.
Given any possible way for things to be arranged - that is, any way thatsome or other things at some or other world are arranged - things of anyintrinsic nature whatever (shape and size permitting) may be arrangedin just that way. We said that if there are a unicorn at one world anda dragon at another, then (size and shape permitting) there is a third worldwhere duplicates of the dragon and the unicorn coexist. In just the sameway we may say that if seventeen unicorns stand in a certain arrangementat one world and there are seventeen dragons at another world, then (sizeand shape permitting) there is a third world where duplicates of the dragonsare arranged just as the unicorns in the first world are. This is really justpart of our original principle of recombination.
Once we suppose that there are further external relations, for instancethe one by which the concrete world allegedly selects abstract simpleelements, then our principle of independence needs to be generalised. Nomatter what novel external relations there may be, it remains unintelligiblethat the intrinsic nature of a thing should constrain the external relationsin which it stands.
Given modal realism, I can understand these principles of independentvariation in terms of duplicate individuals in different possible worlds.
The ersatzer cannot be expected to understand them in that way. But hehad better have some way to understand them - if not, so much the worsefor his position - and mutatis mutandis, he too should find themcompelling.

182Paradise on the Cheap?
In short: if the concrete world selects elements by an internal relation,
we have no conception whatever of the differences among elements invirtue of which some are selected rather than others; and it is only bymagic that 'selects' could be our word for any such relation. If, on theother hand, the concrete world selects elements by an external relation,
it is the relation itself that is magical: what spell constrains it to correspondrigidly to goings-on in the concrete world? Either way, ersatzism thatrelies on such a relation is justly called `magical'; and is to be rejected.
Some further hypotheses may be considered, but I do not think theydo any better.
(1)Selection is an external relation, magically constrained to correspondto goings-on in the world; however, there are irrelevant differences betweenthe elements, so they are not all exactly alike.
(2)Selection is a mixed relation: it is the conjunction of an internalrelation that relies on differences of elements, whereof we have noconception, with an external relation that is magically constrained tocorrespond to goings-on in the world.
(3)Selection is not even an external relation. It is not even determinedby the intrinsic nature of the composite, element plus concrete world,
taken as a whole; still less by the intrinsic natures of the two relata takenseparately. It is like the relation of belonging to a common owner, asmy watch and my wallet do, which involves not only the two relata butalso the owner and a certain amount of the social environment. This wouldpresumably make it equivalent to an external relation of elements tosomething even more inclusive than the entire concrete world, but themagical constraining is still there.
(4)Selection is not any kind of natural relation. There is nothing toit but a list - a list entirely out of reach of our thought and language.
Element E is selected iff:
E is N1, and P1; or E is N2, and P2; or .. .
where the Ns are mere proper names of elements. No such names couldpossibly be available to us; so again it's magic if the ersatzer understandshis own primitive.
I expect protest from the magicians. Not indeed from this-worldlymagicians - there aren't any, or if there are, you can't prove it from theirpublished writings.* However, many leading philosophers of modalityfavour nondescript ersatzism. They offer, more or less fully, what amountsto the positive side of the magician's story: the elements, selection ofelements by the concrete world, implication among elements, the Boolean*(Added in proof): True when written; but Peter van Inwagen's 'Two Concepts of PossibleWorlds', soon to appear in Mid-West Studies in Philosophy 11, will be an explicit andformidable defence of magical ersatzism.

Magical Ersatzism 183algebra with its maximal elements that serve as ersatz worlds. They tellus little about the nature of the elements, except that somehow they areabstract. They tell us, in effect (in one terminology or another), that theelements represent; but they don't say how. But they do not offer the denialsof structure that distinguish a magical ersatzer from a linguistic or pictorialone. So what they give us is a schema to fit a variety of theories. (Includingmy own, as noted above, if sets of worlds count as `abstract'.) Howeverthese nondescript ersatzers have close counterparts at other worlds who dooffer the denials, and therefore are genuine magicians. It is these other-
worldly magicians who will protest. (Not against me, of course, since theyhave no telescopes to read my writings; rather, against any of their ownworldmates who write as I do; but let us ignore that.) They say -
You have taken such pains to state our views in an austere andunfamiliar way! That is just a cheap trick to alienate the reader fromsomething perfectly commonplace. He would know very well what the`elements' and the 'selecting' of them are, if only you would give themtheir customary names.
Different other-worldly magicians would offer different suggestions aboutwhat the customary names are. Thereby they would remind us of differentthis-worldly nondescript ersatzist authors: for instance Plantinga,
Stalnaker, van Inwagen, Slote," Prior and Fine,12 and Forrest. But Idoubt that they would attach great importance to their disagreements withone another. They say -
Elements are states of affairs, or ways things might be, or possibilities,
or propositions, or complex structural properties (for short: structures)
that might belong to the entire concrete world. Selected elements arestates of affairs that obtain, or ways things are, or realised possibilities,
or true propositions, or structures that the concrete world has. Onestate of affairs is there being a talking donkey, or one way things mightbe is that there might be a talking donkey, or one possibility is thatthere be a talking donkey, or one proposition is that there is a talkingdonkey, or one structure is including a talking donkey. Necessarily,
iff there were a talking donkey, then that state of affairs would11 and Essence, pages 146-56.12Their work raises further complications which I ignore when placing them in thecompany of the others listed. (1) Prior elsewhere suggests that his 'quantification' overpropositions somehow carries no ontological commitment (Objects of Thought, pages31-9). (2) Even if propositions exist, Prior and Fine suggest that some of them exist onlycontingently, because they involve individuals that exist contingently; and just as theremight have been other individuals than there are, so there might have been otherpropositions. Then iterated modality cannot be quantification over ersatz worlds takenas maximally specific propositions that actually exist.

184Paradise on the Cheap?
obtain, or that way things might be would be a way things are, or thatpossibility would be realised, or that proposition would be true, or thatstructure would be had by the concrete world. And what could be easierthan that?
This seems to help, but I think it just covers up the problem. Yes, wehave all those customary names: 'states of affairs', 'ways things mightbe', and the rest. We have no difficulty at all in using them correctly;
or at least, we have thoroughly mastered a limited repertory of uses. Ouruse of the names associates them in the first instance with roles in ourthought. I suppose it is a firm commitment of common sense that thereare some entities or other that fill the roles, and therefore deserve thenames. But that is not to say that we have much notion what sort of entitiesthose are. We can toss the names around and never think what mannerof entities we are talking about. Only when we want to improve oncommon sense, and get something more systematic and unified anddefinite, does the question arise. The entities that deserve the names arethe entities best suited to fill the roles. To figure out what those are, wemust survey the candidates according to our best systematic theory ofwhat there is. It's no good saying: which are they? - why, they are thestates of affairs! (Or the ways things might be, or . . . .) You might aswell interrupt a serious discussion of how to cast a play and say: whoshall be Polonius? - Let it be Polonius!
The magicians' protest is just like the bogus assistance we got inunderstanding the supposed internal relation of selection. We were toldthat the relevant intrinsic properties of the elements were such`representational properties' as, for instance, the property of representingthat a donkey talks. But we were none the wiser. For we saw that theproperty of representing that a donkey talks was none other than theproperty - we knew not what - that distinguishes the element such that,
necessarily, it is selected iff a donkey talks. If at that point, we had beentold that this element was called there being a donkey that talks, thatalso might have seemed helpful. But it would have been just as empty.
The name is reserved for that which occupies a role. But it does not occupythe role just by bearing the name, any more than you can rule the worldjust by being named 'Donald'. The naming does nothing at all towardtelling us what entity occupies the role, or how it manages to do whatit must do to deserve the name. If I cannot see how something can dowhat it must do to deserve a name, it's no answer to be told that it justdoes; and it's no answer to be given a tendentious name for it thatpresupposes that it somehow does. If I cannot see how an abstract simple,
for instance, could deserve the name 'state of affairs' or 'there being atalking donkey', because I don't see what we could have for a relationof selection, it's no answer just to stipulate that it is so named.

Magical Ersatzism185Understand that I am not opposed to states of affairs, ways things mightbe, possibilities, propositions, or structures. I believe in all those things.
That is to say, I believe in entities that deserve the names because theyare well suited to play the roles. The entities I put forward as candidatesare the same in every case: sets of worlds. Worlds as / understand them:
us and all our surroundings, and other things like that. The set of alland only those worlds that include a talking donkey as a part, for instance,
is the state of affairs there being a talking donkey. This same set is alsoa way things might be, namely that there might be a talking donkey. Itis also the possibility that there be a talking donkey. It is the propositionthat there is a talking donkey. And it is the structure including a talkingdonkey. The concrete world - or rather, any concrete world - selects justthose sets of worlds that have it as a member. That is what it is for astate of affairs to obtain, or for a way things might be to be a way thingsare, or for a possibility to be realised, or for a proposition to be true,
or for a structure to be had - all relative to a given concrete world, oursor another.
I do not mean to wax monopolistic, claiming that sets of worlds arethe only candidates suited to play the roles and deserve the names. Amongthe entities I am most committed to, possible individuals and set-theoreticconstructions out of them, there are plenty of other candidates. It mighteven be, sometimes, that other candidates are preferable to the sets ofworlds. For the roles associated with the names are by no means fullyand uncontroversially settled. Sets of worlds are well suited to someversions of the roles, other constructions are better suited to other versions.
Recall, for instance, the versions of the proposition-role that wedistinguished in section 1.5. If it is central to the conception you associatewith 'proposition' that there should be some sort of quasi-syntacticstructure, so that it makes sense to speak of subject-predicate propositionsor negative or conjunctive or quantified propositions, then sets of worldswould not do; but there are more complicated set-theoretic constructionsout of possible individuals that could serve instead. Or if it is crucial that`propositions' should serve as contents of belief and desire, I wouldrecommend not sets of possible worlds but sets of possible individuals.
Likewise there is room for different versions of 'ways things might be'or 'possibilities' or 'structures'. If you mean to include ways thatsomething less than an entire world might be, then again you need setsof possible individuals. If part of the role you associate with these termsis a principle of identity of indiscernibles, you had better take not justany sets but only those that include both or neither of any pair ofindiscernible individuals. If, on the other hand, you want to confine yourattention to maximal 'ways', and you do not require guaranteed identityof indiscernibles, then you might as well replace unit sets by their solemembers. If you associate with 'state of affairs' a role involving

186Paradise on the Cheap?
predication, I would recommend individual-property pairs, where theproperty in turn is taken as a set of possible individuals. And so on.
All this is a matter of fitting suitable entities to the various rather ill-
defined roles that we rather indecisively associate with various familiarnames. Don't think of it as a matter of discovering which entities reallyare the states of affairs, or the ways things might be, or the possibilities,
or the propositions, or the structures!
Of course, these many candidates for the playing of roles and thedeserving of names are not available to an ersatzer. I could constructexcellent ersatz worlds in ever so many ways, drawing on the genuineworlds for raw material; but he who believes in one concrete world onlyhas no use for any of these constructions.
When the ersatzer needs his own candidates to play the roles and deservethe names, let him introduce them to us properly. If he offers set-theoreticconstructions out of the parts of the concrete world, on the linguistic plan,
that is fair play. I have argued that the candidates so produced will bedefective owing to false conflations, but maybe their defects are tolerable.
And if he tells us about some other entities he believes in that he deemssuited to the roles, that too is fair play - if he really does tell us aboutthem. What is not fair is just to declare: the entities that play the rolesare none other than the entities that play the roles! Or, equivalently: noneother than the states of affairs, the ways things might be, the possibilities,
the propositions, the structures.
If the magical ersatzer wants his 'customary names' for the elements,
he can have them. I can still put my dilemma against him. He says thesetwo simples are states of affairs; he says this one is there being a talkingdonkey, while that one is there being a philosophising cat. I ask: whyis it that way around? What makes it so that the first, rather than thesecond, is rightly called by the name he gives it? What makes it so thatthe first, rather than the second, is the one such that, necessarily, it obtainsiff there is a talking donkey? Does he say it is because of the distinctiveintrinsic nature of the first? But the second has a distinctive nature too.
And I cannot see how the distinctive nature of the first could have anythingespecially to do with talking donkeys. It's not as if the first consists inpart of a talking donkey, or of the words 'talking donkey', or of somethingwhich could have been isomorphic to a talking donkey if only there hadbeen one for it to be isomorphic to. To be a magician is exactly to renounceall such answers as these. Or does he say it is because of the distinctivenecessary connections of the first? But why is it the first rather than thesecond that has those necessary connections? And how can anything havethem?
And if it were an ersatz world, a maximal state of affairs that couldnot be named by any finite phrase, the dilemma would be no different.
What makes this one, but not that one, be an ersatz world according to

Magical Ersatzism187which a donkey talks? Is it a matter of distinctive intrinsic natures? Whatcan the distinctive nature of a simple have to do with whether a donkeytalks? Or is it a matter of how this one, as opposed to that, is hookedup in the network of necessary connections?
I must put my question by example: how is it represented that a donkeytalks? Or schematically: how is it represented that so-and-so? I cannotput my question as a proper generalisation, else it might get a triflinganswer. I cannot ask: what is it, in general, for proposition P to be trueat ersatz world E? For then the magician might say (unless he is the sortwho calls the elements themselves 'propositions') that just as I takepropositions as sets of worlds, so he takes propositions as sets of ersatzworlds; and P is true at E iff E is a member of P. This gets us nowhere.
A certain set of ersatz worlds is the proposition that a donkey talks ratherthan being, say, the proposition that a cat philosophises. What makesit so? - Having as members exactly those ersatz worlds which representthat a donkey talks. And which are those? - We are back to our previousproblem. We have only taken it from singular to plural. It used to be:
how does an ersatz world represent that a donkey talks? What makesthis ersatz world be one according to which a donkey talks? Now it is:
how do all and only these ersatz worlds represent that a donkey talks?
What makes this set be the one that is the proposition that a donkey talks?
As yet, we have considered only magical ersatz worlds: abstract simplesthat can somehow be selected by the entire concrete world. As with otherversions of ersatzism, we also need ersatz possible individuals. Theindividuals cannot be parts of the worlds, as happens in genuine modalrealism or pictorial ersatzism, because our magical ersatz worlds aresimples. Instead they must be further abstract entities, of a kind withthe ersatz worlds, as happens in linguistic ersatzism.
The theories of ersatz worlds and ersatz individuals will be parallel.
We have more elements, more abstract simples different from the onesconsidered before. Again, some of them are selected; but this time,
elements are selected not by the entire concrete world but by variousindividuals that are parts of it. The selection of elements depends on whatsort of individual does the selecting. Thus there are some elements thatcannot be selected by any individual unless it is a talking donkey; andthere is one such that, necessarily, it is selected by an individual iff thatindividual is a talking donkey. We take selection as a binary relation whicheach individual bears to the elements it selects. Element E implies elementF iff, necessarily, any individual that selects E also selects F. Again, theelements taken under implication comprise a complete, atomic Booleanalgebra. And in the algebra are maximal elements, not implied by other(non-null) elements. Necessarily, an individual selects one and only onemaximal element; it also selects all elements implied by that maximal

188Paradise on the Cheap?
element. Every (non-null) element is implied by at least one maximalelement, and can therefore be selected. So far, all is as before.
And now for something a little different: representing turns relational.
An element E represents that individual X does so-and-so, or X does so-
and-so according to E, iff, necessarily, if X selects E, then X does so-
and-so. (I use 'does so-and-so' as schematic for an arbitrary predicate;
it needn't have anything to do with activity.) This is how maximalelements, in particular, represent. The new maximal elements are the ersatzindividuals.
As genuine possible individuals may be worldmates, so ersatz individualsmay be ersatz worldmates. We can have this as a special case of somethingmore general: call elements E and F compatible iff it is possible that thereare individuals that select both E and F. (Not necessarily the same, notnecessarily different, but both part of the one and only concrete world.)
There's no need to keep our new batch of elements distinct from theold batch; because there are some of our new elements that can be selectedonly by the entire concrete world - which is, after all, one big individual -
and those ones may be identified with our old elements. We can say thatan ersatz individual inhabits an ersatz world iff the two are compatible.
End of theory.
The preliminary skirmishing goes just as before. And so does myprincipal dilemma. Is selecting an internal relation? - Then I think wehave no conception of the 'representational properties' of the elementsin virtue of which it obtains. And it's no help saying, for instance, thatone element has the property of representing as a talking donkey, if allwe can mean by that is that it has whatever intrinsic nature distinguishesthe element such that, necessarily, it is selected by an individual iff thatindividual is a talking donkey. Is selecting an external relation? - Thenhow can it fail to be possible for the character of the selecting individualto vary independently of which elements it selects? One way there is magicin the ersatzer's supposed understanding of his primitive, the other waythere is magic in the working of the primitive itself, and either way thetheory is to be rejected.
Again I expect a magicians' protest. But this time, I think the other-
worldly magical ersatzers will find themselves allied (if there can be sucha thing as a trans-world alliance) with some this-worldly friends of theforms. For this time, after they say that there would have been no mysteryif I had given the elements their customary names, they will say -
Elements are properties, or ways a thing might be, or possibilities foran individual. Elements selected by an individual are properties whichthat individual has, or ways it is, or possibilities it realises. One propertyis being a talking donkey, or one way a thing might be is that it mightbe a talking donkey, or one possibility for an individual is that it be

Magical Ersatzism189a talking donkey. Necessarily, iff some individual is a talking donkey,
then it would have that property, or that way a thing might be wouldbe a way it is, or it would realise that possibility. And what could beeasier than that?
The previous magicians' protest is subsumed if we say, as we well might,
that to a state of affairs or a proposition there corresponds the propertyof being a concrete world wherein that state of affairs obtains or whichmakes that proposition true; that a way 'things' might be is better calleda way the entire concrete world might be; that because the concrete worldis a big individual, a possibility for it is a special case of a possibilityfor an individual; and that a complex structural property which mightbelong to the entire concrete world is just one kind of property amongothers.
My reply is as before. 'Property', and the rest, are names associatedin the first instance with roles in our thought. It is a firm commitmentof common sense that there are some entities or other that play the rolesand deserve the names, but our practical mastery of uses of the namesdoes not prove that we have much notion what manner of entities thoseare. That is a question for theorists. I believe in properties. That is, Ihave my candidates for entities to play the role and deserve the name.
My principal candidates are sets of possible individuals. (But I can offeryou alternatives - other set-theoretic constructions out of possibleindividuals - to suit different versions of the role. I can offer you entitieswith quasi-syntactic structure, if you like; or candidates for propertiesthat are had to a degree, or relative to a time, or relative to a place -
though I think it better to call such things `relations'.) My candidatesto play the role and deserve the name of properties are, of course,
unavailable to the ersatzer. When he needs his own, let him introducethem properly. Set-theoretic constructions out of parts of the actual worldare fair, suffer from false conflations, but might be good enough. If hetells us about some other entities he believes in that he deems suitableto play the role of properties, let him really tell us. It's unfair just todeclare: the entities that play those roles are none other than the properties!
But all is not quite as before, because this time we have a red herring:
what about universals? Or sets of duplicate tropes? I have granted thatI find theories of universals or tropes intelligible, though I suspendjudgement about their truth. What's more, universals would be in a senseabstract, though not according to the Negative Way, and at least someof them well might be simples; likewise for tropes. And universals or tropeswould not be constructions out of the possible individuals that the ersatzerrejects. So here he has just what he needs to play the role and deservethe name of properties, and I am in no position to complain. - Not so.
I insist once again: the theoretical roles we associate with various familiar

190 Paradise on the Cheap?
names are by no means fully settled. In section 1.5, I distinguished variouslegitimate conceptions of properties; and in particular, I distinguishedthe roles of abundant versus sparse properties. What the ersatzer needsare candidates for the role of abundant properties. He needs enough ofthe maximal ones to serve as all the ersatz individuals, and then thereare all the non-maximal ones besides. Universals, or sets of duplicatetropes, would never do as abundant properties - it is just absurd to thinkthat an individual has all its countless abundant properties as non-
spatiotemporal parts! They could be candidates only for the role of sparseproperties.
So magical ersatzism is no better off for ersatz possible individuals ingeneral than it is for ersatz possible worlds. If abstract simples are toserve as abundant properties, and in particular as the maximal ones thatare the ersatz individuals, then we need a selection relation that individualsbear to these abstract simples, and we are not given the needed relationjust by being told to call it 'having a property' .13Now I can return to a piece of unfinished business from section 3.2. Wewere imagining a linguistic ersatzer who built his worldmaking languageon the Lagadonian plan. I said his language was inadequate, because ithad no words for natural properties alien to this world. He replied thatthe needful uninstantiated properties were part of this world, and hedeclared them one and all to be names of themselves. I wondered whathe could mean by 'properties' and eliminated various candidates: my setsof possible individuals, abstractions from (non-Lagadonian) predicates,
universals, sets of duplicate tropes. But I left it open that he might meanthe sort of magical elements we have just been discussing. Now I have"In asking how the selection relation could possibly work if abstract simples - abstractin the sense of the Negative Way - are supposed to play the role of properties, I havein part restated familiar arguments against properties understood as transcendent forms.
Thus when I ask why, if the relation is external, it is impossible for the character of thingsto vary independently of the elements they select, I take this to be much the same pointthat Armstrong makes when he writes: 'Is it not clear that a's whiteness is not determinedby a's relationship with a transcendent entity? Perform the usual thought-experiment andconsider a without the Form of Whiteness. It seems obvious that a might still be white'
(Universals and Scientific Realism, volume I, page 68). Armstrong imagines away theform itself: I leave the form and imagine away the thing's relationship to it, but otherwisethe point is the same. As Armstrong says, and I agree, the force of the thought-experimentdepends on the transcendence of the form. If unit charge is supposed to be a non-
spatiotemporal part of the particle itself - an immanent universal rather than a transcendentform, therefore located and not abstract in the sense of the Negative Way - it would seemnot in the least obvious that we could imagine away the unit charge and yet leave theparticle as charged as ever. Nor, pace Armstrong (volume I, page 37), does the point applyto properties understood as sets; at least, not if they are sets of possible individuals, asI would have them. You cannot consider the thing in question to fall outside the set ofall actual and possible white things, and leave it still white.

Magical Ersatzism191raised objections against that alternative as well. Properties understoodas abundant abstract simples, instantiated by means of a relation thateither cannot be understood unless by magic or else works by magicalnecessary connections, are no better as building blocks for a set-theoreticconstruction of ersatz worlds than they are for the more direct uses wehave been considering. The position is a hybrid of linguistic and magicalersatzism. It avoids some of the disadvantages of the former by givingitself the worse disadvantages of the latter.
It is somewhat of an artificial exercise to evaluate magical ersatzism, sinceit is not at all clear that we have any theory here to evaluate. Still, if therewere such a theory, how well might it meet the objections I have raisedagainst linguistic and pictorial ersatzism?
Does it take modality as primitive? - Yes, overtly and abundantly. Andif we take the version in which selection is an external relation, its primitivemodality is of an especially repugnant sort: necessary connections wherethere ought to be independent variation.
Does it conflate indiscernible possibilities? - Perhaps. I see no reasonwhy it should if selection is an external relation. If selection is an internalrelation, however, there may well be a problem. If we had two elementswith exactly the same 'representational properties', there is no way thatone could be selected and the other not; so they would not be alternativepossibilities. (Further, the mutual implication of the indiscernibles violatesthe assumption that we have a Boolean algebra. But no doubt that partof the theory is negotiable.)
Does it ignore or conflate possibilities involving alien naturalproperties? - I see no reason why it should.
Is its ontology more credible than my own? - It is certainly quitedifferent. And we are told so little that incredulity cannot gain a foothold.
I suppose that is one way to gain credibility. It is not a good way.

4Counterparts or Double Lives?
4.1 Good Questions and BadPeter van Inwagen has written that anyone who is rightly taught - thatis, anyone who has read Plantinga -
will see that there is no problem of trans-world identity. He will find thatall attempts he knows of to formulate the supposed problem are eitherincoherent or else have such obvious 'solutions' that they do not deserveto be called problems. He will realize that it was all done with mirrors —
that is, with empty words and confused pictures. There is, therefore, nolonger any excuse for talking as if there were a 'problem of trans-worldidentity'. (`Plantinga on Trans-World Identity', page 101.)
Nevertheless, I shall devote the whole of this final chapter to the problemof trans-world identity.
Still, to a great extent I agree with van Inwagen's harsh judgement.
Very often we do meet formulations that probably manifest confusion,
and that are apt to cause it. I shall begin by separating questions. I thinkthere are some good ones to be found, as well as the incoherent onesand the ones with uncontroversial 'solutions'.
The first thing to say is that our topic, like the Holy Roman Empire,
is badly named; we may continue to use the customary name, but onlyif we are careful not to take it seriously. In the first place we should bearin mind that Trans-World Airlines is an intercontinental, but not as yetan interplanetary, carrier. More important, we should not suppose thatwe have here any problem about identity.
We never have. Identity is utterly simple and unproblematic. Everythingis identical to itself; nothing is ever identical to anything else except itself.
There is never any problem about what makes something identical to itself;
192

Good Questions and Bad193nothing can ever fail to be. And there is never any problem about whatmakes two things identical; two things never can be identical. There mightbe a problem about how to define identity to someone sufficiently lackingin conceptual resources - we note that it won't suffice to teach him certainrules of inference - but since such unfortunates are rare, even amongphilosophers, we needn't worry much if their condition is incurable.
We do state plenty of genuine problems in terms of identity. But weneedn't state them so. Therefore they are not problems about identity.
Is it ever so that an F is identical to a G? That is, is it ever so that thesame thing is an F, and also a G? More simply, is it ever so that an Fis a G? The identity drops out. Thus it is a good question whether a riveris something you can bathe in twice; or whether a restaurant is somethingthat can continue to exist through a simultaneous change in ownershipand location and name; or whether numbers are von Neumann ordinals;
or whether there is something that all charged particles have in common;
or whether there could be a time traveller who meets his younger self;
or whether there was ever a genuine nation that included both Austriaand Hungary. All of these questions could be stated in terms of identity -
harmlessly, unless that way of stating the questions confused us aboutwhere to seek for answers.
Likewise for the question whether worlds ever overlap; that is, whethertwo worlds ever have a common part; that is, whether any part of oneworld is ever part of another as well; that is, whether there is ever identitybetween parts of different worlds. This is a good question, but not aquestion about identity. Or rather, it is a good question for genuine modalrealists; it makes little sense as a question for ersatzers. I consider thisquestion in section 4.2, where I shall defend a qualified negative answer.
It is also a good question, but it is a different good question, whetherthere is anything that overlaps two different worlds, and so is in bothin the way that a highway may be in two different states. Again, I couldstate it in terms of identity: is there ever identity between things that are(partly) in different worlds? Really it is not a question about identity,
but about mereology: is there any reason to restrict mereologicalsummation so that several things have a mereological sum only if all ofthem are parts of a single world? The follow-up question concernssemantics: if summation is unrestricted, so that indeed there are trans-
world individuals, are these mere oddities? Are they nameless, do theyfall outside the extensions of ordinary predicates and the domains ofordinary quantification? Or do they include things of importance to us,
such as ourselves? I consider these questions in section 4.3, where I shallacknowledge the existence of trans-world individuals but dismiss themas oddities.
It is yet another good question, and this time it is a good question forgenuine modal realists and ersatzers alike, whether it ever happens that

194Counterparts or Double Lives?
anything exists according to two different (genuine or ersatz) worlds. Ifyou like, I can state this question too in terms of identity: does it everhappen that something which exists according to one world and somethingwhich exists according to another are identical? The answer to that oughtto be uncontroversial: yes, that very often happens. Take our worldmateHubert Humphrey, for instance. The Humphrey who exists accordingto our world and the Humphrey who exists according to some other worldsare identical. (It is too bad that grammar demands the plural.) That is,
Humphrey exists according to many different (genuine or ersatz) worlds.
According to ours, he exists and he lost the presidential election; accordingto others, he exists and he won. This is a question that, as van Inwagensays, does not deserve to be called a problem.
But what does deserve to be called a problem is the follow-up question:
what is it for Humphrey to exist according to a world? What isrepresentation de re? How does a world, genuine or ersatz, represent,
concerning Humphrey, that he exists? This one is not a question forgenuine modal realists and ersatzers alike. Or rather, it is not one questionfor both. The available answers for genuine and for ersatz worlds willlook quite different.
A genuine world might do it by having Humphrey himself as a part.
That is how our own world represents, concerning Humphrey, that heexists. But for other worlds to represent in the same way that Humphreyexists, Humphrey would have to be a common part of many overlappingworlds, and somehow he would have to have different properties indifferent ones. I reject such overlap, for reasons to be considered shortly.
There is a better way for a genuine world to represent, concerningHumphrey, that he exists. Humphrey may be represented in absentia atother worlds, just as he may be in museums in this world. The museumcan have a waxwork figure to represent Humphrey, or better yet ananimated simulacrum. Another world can do better still: it can have aspart a Humphrey of its own, a flesh-and-blood counterpart of ourHumphrey, a man very like Humphrey in his origins, in his intrinsiccharacter, or in his historical role. By having such a part, a world representsde re, concerning Humphrey - that is, the Humphrey of our world, whomwe as his worldmates may call simply Humphrey - that he exists and doesthus-and-so. By waving its arm, the simulacrum in the museum representsHumphrey as waving his arm; by waving his arm, or by winning thepresidential election, the other-worldly Humphrey represents the this-
worldly Humphrey as waving or as winning. That is how it is thatHumphrey - our Humphrey - waves or wins according to the other world.
This is counterpart theory, the answer I myself favour to the questionhow a world represents de re.1See my 'Counterpart Theory and Quantified Modal Logic'; 'Counterparts of Persons

Good Questions and Bad195(The same goes in reverse. Our Humphrey is a counterpart of manyHumphreys of many other worlds. I deny that the counterpart relationis always symmetrical, but surely it often is. So here are many other-
worldly Humphreys who win the presidency, but who lose according tothis world. They are represented as losing by the presence here ofHumphrey the loser.)
There are various ways that an ersatz world might represent, concerningHumphrey, that he exists, or that he waves, or that he wins. It dependson what sort of ersatz world we are dealing with. A linguistic ersatz worldmight include English sentences that mention Humphrey by name:
`Humphrey exists', 'Humphrey waves', 'Humphrey wins'. Or it mightinclude sentences of some other worldmaking language, which mentionHumphrey by some other name. Or it might instead include sentencesof the worldmaking language which say explicitly that there is someoneof a certain description who exists, and waves, and wins; and this couldqualify as representation de re concerning Humphrey if the descriptionsufficiently resembles the description of Humphrey as he actually is. Or,
instead of saying explicitly that there is someone of the appropriatedescription, a linguistic ersatz world might say it implicitly, by meansof many sentences having to do with the vacancy or occupation ofspacetime points, or with the instantiating of various elementary universalsby various elementary particulars. A pictorial ersatz world might havea part which is a picture, made out of stuff that is in some mysterioussense abstract, of Humphrey waving and winning. A magical ersatz worldmight represent that Humphrey exists and waves and wins by having someineffable distinctive intrinsic nature. Or it might do it by means of brutenecessary connections: necessarily, if some simple element stands in someunanalysable relation to the concrete world then Humphrey exists andwaves and wins.
It is sometimes thought that ersatzism is better off than counterparttheory in respecting certain intuitions: intuitions that de re modality hasto do with the res itself, not some imitation or substitute or counterpart.
Thus Kripke makes his famous complaint that on my view. . . if we say 'Humphrey might have won the election (if only he had donesuch-and-such),' we are not talking about something that might havehappened to Humphrey, but to someone else, a 'counterpart'. Probably,
however, Humphrey could not care less whether someone else, no matterhow much resembling him, would have been victorious in another possibleworld. (Naming and Necessity, page 45.)
and Their Bodies'; and Counterfactuals, pages 39-43; also David Kaplan, `TransworldHeir Lines'.

196Counterparts or Double Lives?
Coming from an advocate of genuine modal realism with overlap, thiscomplaint might have some force. But here it comes only a page awayfrom Kripke's equally famous remark thatA possible world isn't a distant country that we are coming across, orviewing through a telescope. (Page 44.)
Joking aside (he does say that 'another possible world is too far away'),
Kripke's point seems to be that we are supposed to respect Humphrey'sintuition that it is he himself who would have been victorious in anotherworld, and we are supposed to do this by declining to think of that otherworld as the sort of thing that he himself could even be part of! Whatis going on?
I think counterpart theorists and ersatzers are in perfect agreement thatthere are other worlds (genuine or ersatz) according to which Humphrey -
he himself! (stamp the foot, bang the table) - wins the election. And weare in equal agreement that Humphrey - he himself - is not part of theseother worlds. Somehow, perhaps by containing suitable constituents orperhaps by magic, but anyhow not by containing Humphrey himself, theother world represents him as winning. If there were any genuine modalrealists who believed in overlap of worlds, they would indeed be in aposition to insist that at another world we have Humphrey himself winningthe presidency. That might indeed be a point in their favour. But it isnot a point in favour of any other view but theirs, and in particular itis not a point in favour of any kind of ersatzism.
Counterpart theory does say (and ersatzism does not) that someoneelse - the victorious counterpart - enters into the story of how it is thatanother world represents Humphrey as winning, and thereby enters intothe story of how it is that Humphrey might have won. Insofar as theintuitive complaint is that someone else gets into the act, the point is rightlytaken. But I do not see why that is any objection, any more than it wouldbe an objection against ersatzism that some abstract whatnot gets intothe act. What matters is that the someone else, or the abstract whatnot,
should not crowd out Humphrey himself. And there all is well. Thanksto the victorious counterpart, Humphrey himself has the requisite modalproperty: we can truly say that he might have won. There is no need todeny that the victorious counterpart also makes true a second statementdescribing the very same possibility: we can truly say that a Humphrey-
like counterpart might have won. The two statements are not incompetition. Therefore we need not suppress the second (say, byforbidding any mixture of ordinary modal language with talk ofcounterparts) in order to safeguard the first.22Here I am indebted to Mondadori; see his `Counterpartese, Counterpartese*,
Counterpartesep.' But I disagree with him at one point. He grants that I may truly say

Good Questions and Bad197I said that counterpart theory and ersatzism are alike in denying thatHumphrey himself is part of the other world which represents him aswinning. But that was a little too quick. Counterpart theory and ersatzismare also alike in having trick ways to dodge the conclusion. In both casesthere is a loophole to exploit, but exploiting the loophole does nothingto satisfy the alleged intuition that it must be Humphrey himself whowins. For the counterpart theorist, the trick is to say that 'Humphrey'names not the Humphrey of our world, and not the Humphrey of another,
but rather the trans-world individual who is the mereological sum ofall these local Humphreys. If that is what Humphrey is (but I shall arguein section 4.3 that it isn't), then indeed he himself is partly in this worldand partly in that and not wholly in any. Part of him loses and part ofhim wins. But presumably the losing part cares what might have happenedto it; it could not care less what happens to some other slice off the samegreat salami - unless, of course, the world containing that other-worldlyslice of Humphrey can be taken as a world that represents the this-worldlyslice as winning.
For the ersatzer (of the linguistic persuasion) the trick is to rememberthat anything you please can serve as a word of the worldmaking language.
Humphrey might as well be used as his own name, in Lagadonian fashion.
Then he will be, if not a part, at least a set-theoretic constituent of theersatz world which is a set of sentences saying inter alia that he wins.
So what? Presumably he could not care less what words of what languagesare assembled with him into what set-theoretic structures - unless, ofcourse, we get a linguistic structure that represents him as winning. Lethim by all means care how he can be consistently represented, but notabout the words of the representation. It is perfectly arbitrary whetherhe serves as a word. And if he does, it is perfectly arbitrary what he means.
If Humphrey is to be made a word, there is no need to make him be hisown name. He would do just as well as a name for Checkers, or as apreposition or adverb. Or he could be the negation sign in a sentencethat denies his existence.
There are at least two more good questions that can be extracted fromthe topic of trans-world identity, though again they have nothing specialto do with identity. I merely state these questions here; I shall take themthat Humphrey himself might have won; but then he insists that if we ask 'who wouldhave had the property of winning,' my answer must be 'not Humphrey, but one of hiscounterparts' (page 81). Not so. The modal predicate 'would have had the property ofwinning' is on a par with the modal predicate 'might have won'. I can apply either predicatein one sense to Humphrey, in another sense to the victorious counterpart. If there is anobjection to be raised, it must be that I can say unwanted things, not that I cannot saywanted things. I reply that the unwanted things are not seriously objectionable in the waythat lack of the wanted things would be.

198Counterparts or Double Lives?
up in sections 4.4 and 4.5. Again they are questions for genuine modalrealists and ersatzers alike. For the sake of neutrality, I shall formulatethem in terms of representation de re; that is, in terms of truth accordingto a world, genuine or ersatz, concerning some actual individual suchas Humphrey.
One is the question of haecceitism. We can distinguish representationof the way things are qualitatively (in a broad sense of that world) fromrepresentation de re. It may be the case according to a world that thereare things of certain kinds, arranged in certain ways, and with certaincausal relationships; these are matters of qualitative character. But alsoit may be the case, according to a world, concerning the individualHumphrey, that he exists and waves and wins. Can these two kinds ofrepresentation vary independently? Or does what a world representsconcerning matters of qualitative character determine what that worldrepresents de re?
The other is the question of constancy. Do we have a settled answer,
fixed once and for all, about what is true concerning a certain individualaccording to a certain (genuine or ersatz) world? Or can different answersbe right in different contexts? Can two opposed answers even be righttogether, in a single context? Can it happen sometimes that no answeris determinately right?
4.2 Against OverlapThe simplest way that part of another world could represent Humphrey -
our Humphrey - is by identity. He might lead a double life, in two worldsat once. He himself, who is part of the actual world, might be part ofthe other world as well. He could be a common part of both, in the sameway that a shared hand might be a common part of two Siamese twins.
The other world represents him as existing because he is part of it. Heexists at the other world because, restricting our quantification to theparts of that world, he exists. This leading of double lives is what bestdeserves to be called 'trans-world identity'.
I cannot name one single philosopher who favours trans-world identity,
thus understood. The philosophers' chorus on behalf of 'trans-worldidentity' is merely insisting that, for instance, it is Humphrey himself whomight have existed under other conditions, who might have been different,
who might have won the presidency, who exists according to many worldsand wins according to some of them: All that is uncontroversial. Thecontroversial question is how he manages to have these modal properties.
The answer now mooted is that he has them by being a shared partcommon to many worlds, and by having different properties relative to

Against Overlap199different worlds that he is part of. Despite its lack of supporters, thisanswer deserves our attention. First, because it is agreeably simple. Second,
because it is the only view that fully respects the 'he himself' intuition:
rival views say that Humphrey himself might have won, and that he himselfis somehow represented as winning, but only this view says that he himselfdoes win. And third, because it is congenial to haecceitism; but I shallpostpone that issue to section 4.4.
The advantages are genuine. Nevertheless trans-world identity, in thesense of overlap of worlds, is to be rejected. Or rather, it is to be rejectedas a general theory of representation de re. There are one or two specialcases of overlap that might be tolerated, but they fall far short of meetingall our needs for representation de re.
My main problem is not with the overlap itself. Things do have sharedparts in common, as in the case of the Siamese twins' hand. Given theunrestricted mereology I favour, sharing of parts is altogethercommonplace. Indeed, any part of any world is part of countlessmereological sums that extend beyond that world. But what I do findproblematic - inconsistent, not to mince words - is the way the commonpart of two worlds is supposed to have different properties in one worldand in the other.
Hubert Humphrey has a certain size and shape, and is composed ofparts arranged in a certain way. His size and shape and composition areintrinsic to him. They are simply a matter of the way he is. They are nota matter of his relations to other things that surround him in this world.
Thereby they differ from his extrinsic properties such as being popular,
being Vice-President of the United States, wearing a fur hat, inhabitinga planet with a moon, or inhabiting a world where nothing goes fasterthan light. Also, his size and shape and composition are accidental, notessential, to him. He could have been taller, he could have been slimmer,
he could have had more or fewer fingers on his hands.3Consider the last. He could have had six fingers on his left hand. Thereis some other world that so represents him. We are supposing now thatrepresentation de re works by trans-world identity. So Humphrey, whois part of this world and here has five fingers on the left hand, is also partof some other world and there has six fingers on his left hand. Qua partof this world he has five fingers, qua part of that world he has six. Hehimself - one and the same and altogether self-identical - has five fingerson the left hand, and he has not five but six. How can this be? You mightas well say that the shared hand of the Siamese twins has five fingersas Ted's left hand, but it has six fingers as Ned's right hand! That is3The next several paragraphs are mostly adapted from my 'Individuation byAcquaintance and by Stipulation', pages 21-2, with the kind permission of the editorsof The Philosophical Review.

200Counterparts or Double Lives?
double-talk and contradiction. Here is the hand. Never mind what elseit is part of. How many fingers does it have? What shape is it?
(You might say that five fingers and the palm are common to Ted andNed, however the sixth finger belongs to Ned alone; and likewise withHumphrey. But no: a proper five-fingered hand differs in shape andcomposition from a proper six-fingered hand less one of its fingers, andlikewise a proper six-fingered hand differs from a proper five-fingeredhand with an extra finger stuck on.)
I expect protest: though it would be contradiction to say, simply,
that Humphrey had five fingers on the left hand and also that he hadnot five but six, that is not what was said. He has five at this world; hehas six at that world. - But how do the modifiers help? There are severalways for modifiers to remove a contradiction. But none of them applyhere.
(1)If a tower is square on the third floor and round on the fourthfloor, no worries; it's just that one segment differs in cross-sectional shapefrom another. The modifiers direct us to consider the shapes of thesegments, not of the whole tower. But the thesis we are considering isthat the whole of Humphrey is part of different worlds, with differentproperties at different ones. It is exactly the trans-world identity that spoilsthis way out.
(2)If a man is honest according to the News and crooked accordingto the Times, no worries; different papers tell different stories about him,
they represent him differently, and at least one of them gets it wrong.
But the thesis we are considering is a form of genuine, not ersatz, modalrealism: the way that Humphrey has a property according to a world isthat Humphrey himself, having that very property, is a part of that world.
(3) If a man is father of Ed and son of Fred, no worries; he bearsdifferent relations to different individuals, and the extrinsic propertieshe thereby has - being a father, being a son - are compatible. Likewiseif the wisest man in the village is by no means the wisest man in the nation.
But our problem does not concern Humphrey's relationships to the thingsthat accompany him in one or another world. Rather, we are dealing withhis intrinsic nature; and the only relations relevant to that are those thatobtain between his own parts. (And if he is part of two worlds, so inturn are his parts.) If you say that Humphrey has five fingers at this worldand six fingers at that, and you take the modifiers to cure the contradiction,
most likely you mean to suggest that having five or six fingers is not anintrinsic property after all, but a relation. (And an external relation - notone that supervenes on the intrinsic properties of the relata.) Then theright thing to say would be that Humphrey bears the five-finger relationto this world and the six-finger relation to that world. Or you might sayit by coining transitive verbs: he five-fingers this world, but he six-fingersthat world. But what are these relations? I know what to say if I want

Against Overlap201to make believe formally that shapes are relations rather than intrinsicproperties, but I know better. If you say that a shape - sphericality, orfive-fingeredness - is just what we always thought it was, except that itis a relation which something may bear to some but not all of the wholesof which it is part, that will not do. What would it be to five-finger onething while six-fingering another? How can these supposed relations bethe shape of something?
They cannot be; and so there is no solution. If indeed Humphrey - hehimself, the whole of him - is to lead a double life as part of two differentworlds, there is no intelligible way for his intrinsic properties to differfrom one world to the other. And it will not do just to declare, whenwe know better, that such things as his size and shape and compositionare after all not among his intrinsic properties.
Call this the problem of accidental intrinsics. It would not arise forHumphrey's essential properties, however intrinsic. For the problem ishow he can have different properties as part of different worlds, and inthe case of essential properties there is no variation to worry about. Itis very hard to see how Humphrey could be a man as part of one worldand an angel as part of another, but if he is essentially human thatdifficulty does not arise.
Neither would it arise for Humphrey's extrinsic properties, howeveraccidental. There are two ways to think of his extrinsic properties: asrelations in disguise, or as genuine properties. (See my discussion in section1.5 of 'properties' that are had relative to this or that.) First, take themas relations. He is related to his surroundings, and we are not supposingthat his surroundings also are common from world to world. Perhapshe owns four dogs who are part of this world, and he owns only threedogs who are part of that other world. That is how the accidental extrinsic`property' of owning four dogs can be a property that he has at this world,
but lacks at that other world of which he is also a part. Owning fourdogs is covertly a relation: Humphrey bears it to the worlds that havehimself and four dogs he owns as parts, and not to any other worlds.
It is as easy for him to have this 'property' at one world and not anotheras it is for a man to be father of Ed and not of Fred.
Second, take his extrinsic properties instead as genuine properties. Thenhe has them simpliciter, and they cannot vary from world to world. Butwhat can vary from world to world is the way we name them, and predicatethem of him - which may give an illusion that the properties themselvesvary. Thus he has, simpliciter, the extrinsic property of owning four dogswho are part of this world; and he has, simpliciter, the property of notowning four dogs who are part of that world. These properties arecompatible, if indeed there is overlap; having both of them is part ofwhat it is to lead a double life in two worlds. But the restricting modifier`at this world' or 'at that world' enables us to refer to these two extrinsic

202Counterparts or Double Lives?
properties by shortened names. In the scope of 'at this world', we candrop the final clause from the name 'the property of owning four dogswho are part of this world'; and in the scope of 'at that world' we canlikewise drop the final clause from the name 'the property of not owningfour dogs who are part of that world'; and that is how it can be trueat this world that he has the property of owning four dogs, and true atthat world that he has the property of not owning four dogs, althoughhis extrinsic properties - properties rightly speaking, as opposed todisguised relations - do not vary from world to world.
There is no problem of accidental intrinsics for rival theories. Not formy own theory, genuine modal realism with counterparts instead ofoverlap: counterparts need not be exact intrinsic duplicates, so, of course,
Humphrey and his counterparts can differ in their intrinsic properties.
Not for the theory that Humphrey is a vast trans-world individual,
composed of distinct parts from different worlds: one part of the vastHumphrey can differ in its intrinsic properties from other parts. Not forany sort of ersatzism: in whatever way it is that ersatz worlds representor misrepresent Humphrey, they can misrepresent him as having intrinsicproperties that in fact he does not have, just as lying newspapers can do.
Our question of overlap of worlds parallels the this-worldly problem ofidentity through time; and our problem of accidental intrinsics parallelsa problem of temporary intrinsics, which is the traditional problem ofchange.4 Let us say that something persists iff, somehow or other, itexists at various times; this is the neutral word. Something perdures iffit persists by having different temporal parts, or stages, at different times,
though no one part of it is wholly present at more than one time; whereasit endures iff it persists by being wholly present at more than one time.
Perdurance corresponds to the way a road persists through space; partof it is here and part of it is there, and no part is wholly present at twodifferent places. Endurance corresponds to the way a universal, if thereare such things, would be wholly present wherever and whenever it isinstantiated. Endurance involves overlap: the content of two differenttimes has the enduring thing as a common part. Perdurance does not.
(There might be mixed cases: entities that persist by having an enduringpart and a perduring part. An example might be a person who consistedof an enduring entelechy ruling a perduring body; or an electron thathad a universal of unit negative charge as a permanent part, but did notconsist entirely of universals. But here I ignore the mixed cases. And whenI speak of ordinary things as perduring, I shall ignore their enduringuniversals, if such there be.)
4My discussion of this parallel problem is much indebted to Armstrong, 'IdentityThrough Time', and to Johnston. I follow Johnston in terminology.

Against Overlap203Discussions of endurance versus perdurance tend to be endarkened bypeople who say such things as this: 'Of course you are wholly presentat every moment of your life, except in case of amputation. For at everymoment all your parts are there: your legs, your lips, your liver . . . .'
These endarkeners may think themselves partisans of endurance, but theyare not. They are perforce neutral, because they lack the conceptualresources to understand what is at issue. Their speech betrays - and theymay acknowledge it willingly - that they have no concept of a temporalpart. (Or at any rate none that applies to a person, say, as opposed toa process or a stretch of time.) Therefore they are on neither side of adispute about whether or not persisting things are divisible into temporalparts. They understand neither the affirmation nor the denial. They arelike the people - fictional, I hope - who say that the whole of the longroad is in their little village, for not one single lane of it is missing. Meaningless than others do by 'part', since they omit parts cut crosswise, theyalso mean less than others do by 'whole'. They say the 'whole' road isin the village; by which they mean that every 'part' is; but by that, theyonly mean that every part cut lengthwise is. Divide the road into its leastlengthwise parts; they cannot even raise the question whether those arein the village wholly or only partly. For that is a question about crosswiseparts, and the concept of a crosswise part is what they lack. Perhaps`crosswise part' really does sound to them like a blatant contradiction.
Or perhaps it seems to them that they understand it, but the villagephilosophers have persuaded them that really they couldn't, so theirimpression to the contrary must be an illusion. At any rate, I have theconcept of a temporal part; and for some while I shall be addressing onlythose of you who share it.5Endurance through time is analogous to the alleged trans-world identityof common parts of overlapping worlds; perdurance through time isanalogous to the `trans-world identity', if we may call it that, of a trans-
world individual composed of distinct parts in non-overlapping worlds.
Perdurance, which I favour for the temporal case, is closer to thecounterpart theory which I favour for the modal case; the difference isthat counterpart theory concentrates on the parts and ignores the trans-
world individual composed of them.
The principal and decisive objection against endurance, as an accountof the persistence of ordinary things such as people or puddles, is theproblem of temporary intrinsics. Persisting things change their intrinsicproperties. For instance shape: when I sit, I have a bent shape; when Istand, I have a straightened shape. Both shapes are temporary intrinsic51 attempt to explain it to others in Philosophical Papers, volume I, pages 76-7. ButI have no great hopes, since any competent philosopher who does not understand somethingwill take care not to understand anything else whereby it might be explained.

204Counterparts or Double Lives?
properties; I have them only some of the time. How is such changepossible? I know of only three solutions.
(It is not a solution just to say how very commonplace and indubitableit is that we have different shapes at different times. To say that is onlyto insist - rightly - that it must be possible somehow. Still less is it a solutionto say it in jargon - as it might be, that bent-on-Monday and straight-
on-Tuesday are compatible because they are 'time-indexed properties' -
if that just means that, somehow, you can be bent on Monday and straighton Tuesday.)
First solution: contrary to what we might think, shapes are not genuineintrinsic properties. They are disguised relations, which an enduring thingmay bear to times. One and the same enduring thing may bear the bent-
shape relation to some times, and the straight-shape relation to others.
In itself, considered apart from its relations to other things, it has noshape at all. And likewise for all other seeming temporary intrinsics; allof them must be reinterpreted as relations that something with anabsolutely unchanging intrinsic nature bears to different times. Thesolution to the problem of temporary intrinsics is that there aren't anytemporary intrinsics. This is simply incredible, if we are speaking of thepersistence of ordinary things. (It might do for the endurance of entelechiesor universals.) If we know what shape is, we know that it is a property,
not a relation.
Second solution: the only intrinsic properties of a thing are those ithas at the present moment. Other times are like false stories; they areabstract representations, composed out of the materials of the present,
which represent or misrepresent the way things are. When something hasdifferent intrinsic properties according to one of these ersatz other times,
that does not mean that it, or any part of it, or anything else, just hasthem - no more so than when a man is crooked according to the Times,
or honest according to the News. This is a solution that rejects endurance;
because it rejects persistence altogether. And it is even less credible thanthe first solution. In saying that there are no other times, as opposed tofalse representations thereof, it goes against what we all believe. No man,
unless it be at the moment of his execution, believes that he has no future;
still less does anyone believe that he has no past.
Third solution: the different shapes, and the different temporaryintrinsics generally, belong to different things. Endurance is to be rejectedin favour of perdurance. We perdure; we are made up of temporal parts,
and our temporary intrinsics are properties of these parts, wherein theydiffer one from another. There is no problem at all about how differentthings can differ in their intrinsic properties.
Some special cases of overlap of worlds face no problem of accidentalintrinsics. One arises on the hypothesis that there are universals, wholly

Against Overlap 205present recurrently as non-spatiotemporal parts of all their particularinstances. If so, thése universals must recur as freely between the worldsas they do within a world. For there is qualitative duplication betweenthe worlds, by the principle of recombination; and universals are supposedto recur whenever there is duplication. Doubtless there are electrons inother worlds than ours. If a universal of unit negative charge is part ofeach and every this-worldly electron, then equally it is part of the other-
worldly electrons; in which case, since parthood is transitive, it is acommon part of all the worlds where there are electrons; and that isoverlap. We expect trouble with the accidental intrinsic properties of thecommon part. But what are those properties in this case? I cannot thinkof any. There isn't much to the intrinsic nature of a universal. Maybeit's intrinsically simple, or maybe it's intrinsically composed, somehow,
of other universals; but if so, that seems to be an essential matter, sowe still have no intrinsic accidents to trouble us. (Likewise these seemto be no temporary intrinsics to trouble us, so there is no problem aboutuniversals enduring through time.) If indeed there are no accidentalintrinsics to raise a problem, then overlap confined to the sharing ofuniversals seems entirely innocent. And also it seems inevitable, if thereare universals at all. So my rejection of overlap must be qualified: whateverthe universals may do, at any rate no two worlds have any particularas a common part.
If there are universals, identical between worlds as they are betweeninstances within a world, then for them we may as well help ourselvesto the simplest method of representation de re: what is true of a universalaccording to a world is what is true of it, when we restrict quantifiersto that world. What is true of it at a world will then be, first, that it hasits constant essential intrinsic nature; and, second, that it has variousrelationships - notably, patterns of instantiation - to other things of thatworld. For instance it will be true of unit negative charge, at one world,
that it is instantiated by exactly seventeen things, which are close together;
and at another world, that it is instantiated by infinitely many widelyscattered things. Thus its extrinsic 'properties', taken as disguised relations,
vary. Its extrinsic properties, properly speaking, do not. But the way wename them does, so that for instance we can say that at one world butnot the other, the universal has the property of being instantiated byseventeen close-together things.66A universal can safely be part of many worlds because it hasn't any accidentalintrinsics. But mightn't the same be said of some simple particulars - tropes, if such therebe, or fundamental particles, or momentary slices thereof? Maybe these things have noaccidental intrinsic properties - it certainly seems hard to think of plausible candidates.
If they haven't, then they too could safely be shared between overlapping worlds. Wewould not face a problem of accidental intrinsics. But I suggest that we would face a parallelproblem of accidental external relations. Suppose we have a pair of two of these simple

206Counterparts or Double Lives?
Another special case of overlap would be, if not altogether innocent, atleast safe from the problem of accidental intrinsics. This is simply thecase in which something does have accidental intrinsic properties, butthey are constant within a limited range of worlds, and the proposedoverlap is confined to the worlds in that limited range. Such limited overlapcould not give us all we need by way of representation de re. For thething does have some accidental intrinsic properties; so there must besome world which represents it as lacking some of these properties; thatmust be a world outside the limited range of overlap; so when that worldrepresents the thing as lacking the properties, that representation de remust work not by trans-world identity but in some other way. Limitedoverlap would have to be combined with some other treatment ofrepresentation de re, presumably some form of counterpart theory.
Even so, limited overlap might be wanted. The most likely case wouldbe limited overlap when branching worlds share a common inital segment.
I distinguish branching of worlds from divergence. In branching, worldsare like Siamese twins. There is one initial spatiotemporal segment; itis continued by two different futures - different both numerically andqualitatively - and so there are two overlapping worlds. One world consistsof the initial segment plus one of its futures; the other world consistsof the identical initial segment plus the other future.
In divergence, on the other hand, there is no overlap. Two worlds havetwo duplicate initial segments, not one that they share in common. I,
and the world I am part of, have only one future. There are other worldsthat diverge from ours. These worlds have initial segments exactly likethat of our world up to the present, but the later parts of these worldsdiffer from the later parts of ours. (Or we could make it relativistic: whatis duplicated is the past cone from some spacetime point, as it might befrom here and now.) Not I, but only some very good counterparts ofme, inhabit these other worlds.
I reject genuine branching in favour of divergence. However there mightparticulars A and B, both of which are common parts of various worlds. A and B area certain distance apart. Their distance, it seems, is a relation of A and B and nothingelse - it is not really a three-place relation of A, B, and this or that world. That meansthat A and B are precisely the same distance apart in all the worlds they are both partof. That means (assuming that we explain representation de re in terms of trans-worldidentity when we can) that it is impossible that A and B should both have existed andbeen a different distance apart. That seems wrong: it is hard to suppose that the distanceis essential to the pair, equally hard to suppose that distance is not the plain two-placerelation that it seems to be. So trans-world identity, even for simple particulars withoutaccidental intrinsic properties, is prima facie trouble. An advocate of it will have someexplaining to do, both as to how he gets around the problem of accidental external relations,
and also as to what motivates it when it cannot provide a fully general account ofrepresentation de re. Such explaining may be found in Johnston, Particulars andPersistence, chapter 4.

Against Overlap207be some reason to go the other way. Consider the philosophers who saythat the future is unreal. It is hard to believe they mean it. If ever anyoneis right that there is no future, then that very moment is his last, andwhat's more is the end of everything. Yet when these philosophers teachthat there is no more time to come, they show no trace of terror or despair!
When we see them planning and anticipating, we might suspect that theybelieve in the future as much as anyone else does. Maybe they only insiston restricting their quantifiers, and all they mean is that nothing futureis present? - No, for they seem to think that what they are saying iscontroversial. What is going on?
Perhaps their meaning is clearer when they turn linguistic, and say thatthere is no determinate truth about the future. A modal realist whobelieved in genuine branching, in which his world overlaps with othersby having initial segments in common, could agree with that. To havedeterminate truth about the future, it helps to have a future; but also,
it helps to have only one future. If there are two futures, and both areequally mine with nothing to choose between them, and one holds a seafight and the other doesn't, what could it mean for me to say that thefuture holds a sea fight? Not a rhetorical question: we have three options.
(1) It is false that the future holds a sea fight; because 'the future' isa denotationless improper description. (2) It is true that the future holdsa sea fight; because 'the future' denotes neither of the two partial futuresbut rather their disunited sum, which does hold a sea fight. (3) It is neithertrue nor false that the future holds a sea fight; because 'the future'has indeterminate denotation, and we get different truth values ondifferent resolutions of the indeterminacy. Offhand, the third option -
indeterminacy - seems best. (At least it lets us talk in the ordinary wayabout matters on which the futures do not differ; what has the same truthvalue on all resolutions is determinately true or false.) But whichever waywe go, our customary thought about 'the' future is in bad trouble. Againstthe common sense idea that we have one single future, advocates of manymay join forces with advocates of none; but the advocates of many havethe better of it, for they have no cause to despair. I do not suggest thatphilosophers of the unreal or indeterminate future are, in fact, modalrealists who accept branching. But modal realists can make good senseof much that they say. So whatever motivates these philosophers to denythat we have a single future might equally motivate a modal realist toaccept branching.
Why not, given that the overlap is limited enough not to raise theproblem of accidental intrinsics? Well, one man's reason is another man'sreductio. The trouble with branching exactly is that it conflicts with ourordinary presupposition that we have a single future. If two futures areequally mine, one with a sea fight tomorrow and one without, it isnonsense to wonder which way it will be - it will be both ways - and yet

208Counterparts or Double Lives?
I do wonder. The theory of branching suits those who think this wonderingis nonsense. Or those who think the wondering makes sense only ifreconstrued: you have leave to wonder about the sea fight, provided thatreally you wonder not about what tomorrow will bring but about whattoday predetermines. But a modal realist who thinks in the ordinary waythat it makes sense to wonder what the future will bring, and whodistinguishes this from wondering what is already predetermined, willreject branching in favour of divergence. In divergence also there are manyfutures; that is, there are many later segments of worlds that begin byduplicating initial segments of our world. But in divergence, only oneof these futures is truly ours. The rest belong not to us but to our other-
worldly counterparts. Our future is the one that is part of the same worldas ourselves. It alone is connected to us by the relations - the (strictly oranalogically) spatiotemporal relations, or perhaps natural external relationsgenerally - that unify a world. It alone is influenced causally by what wedo and how we are in the present. We wonder which one is the futurethat has the special relation to ourselves. We care about it in a way thatwe do not care about all the other-worldly futures. Branching, and thelimited overlap it requires, are to be rejected as making nonsense of theway we take ourselves to be related to our futures; and divergence withoutoverlap is to be preferred.?
There is a less weighty argument against branching, and indeed againstoverlap generally. What unifies a world, I suggested, is that its parts standin suitable external relations, preferably spatiotemporal. But if we haveoverlap, we have spatiotemporal relations between the parts of differentworlds. For instance, let P be the common part - say, a shared initialsegment - of two different worlds W1 and W2, let R1 be the remainderof W1, and let R2 be the remainder of W2 . Then the appropriate unifyingrelations obtain between P and R1, and also between P and R2. But nowthe relations obtain between parts of two different worlds: between P,
which is inter alia a part of the world W1, and R2, which is part of thedifferent world W2.
Of course it is also true that P and R2 are parts of a single world W2.
So at least we can still say that whenever two things are appropriatelyrelated, there is some world they are both parts of, even if they may beparts of other worlds besides. Or can we say even that? In a sense, evenR1 and R2 are related, in a stepwise back-and-forward way, via P. Forinstance, R1 and R2 might stand to one another in the complex temporalrelation: successor-of-a-predecessor-of. Yet R1 and R2 are not both parts7In his 'Theories of Actuality', Adams makes the same point; but while I useit in favour of modal realism without overlap, Adams uses it in favour ofersatzism.

Against Overlap209of any one world. Thus overlap complicates what we must say in explaininghow worlds are unified by spatiotemporal interrelation, and therebydiffer from trans-world individuals composed of parts of several worlds.
The complication is unwelcome, but I think it's nothing worse. Overlapspoils the easiest account of how worlds are unified by interrelation:
namely, the mereological analogue of the definition of equivalence classes.
But alternative accounts are available (as in the parallel problem abouttime discussed in my 'Survival and Identity'), so I presume that amodal realist who wished to accept overlap would not be in seriousdifficulty on this score. Still less is there any problem if the only overlapwe accept is the sharing of universals; we need only say that a world isunified by the spatiotemporal (or whatever) interrelation of its particularparts.
If we stay with the simple account of how worlds are unified, we willconclude that where there is branching, there is one single world composedof all the branches. That would not be branching of worlds, but branchingwithin worlds; and so the overlap of branches would not be overlap ofworlds. Branching within worlds, I think, is to be accepted: it is possiblethat the spacetime of a world might have such a shape, and if that isa possible way for a world to be then it is a way that some world is. Someworld; but there is no reason to think that such a world is ours. Respectfor common sense gives us reason to reject any theory that says that weourselves are involved in branching, or that if we are not, that can onlybe because (contrary to accepted theory) our world is governed bydeterministic laws. But we needn't reject the very possibility that a worldbranches. The unfortunate inhabitants of such a world, if they think of`the future' as we do, are of course sorely deceived, and their peculiarcircumstances do make nonsense of how they ordinarily think. But thatis their problem; not ours, as it would be if the worlds generally branchedrather than diverging.
I noted that our special cases of trans-world identity, sharing ofuniversals and sharing of initial segments in branching, avoid the problemof accidental intrinsics. They avoid another well-known problem as well.
A friend of overlap might wish to say that trans-world identity followslines of qualitative similarity. Or he might not; whether to say this is partof the topic of haecceitism, to be considered in section 4.4. But if he does,
his problem is that identity is transitive, similarity in general is not. Butit is approximate similarity that fails to be transitive; whereas the supposedsharing of universals, and likewise the supposed sharing of initial segmentsin branching, would follow lines of exact similarity. When we have theexact similarity in a respect between two instances of unit negative charge,
or the perfect match when two worlds start out exactly alike in theirhistory, there is no discrepancy of formal character to stop us from takingthese as cases of trans-world identity.

210Counterparts or Double Lives?
4.3 Against Trans-World IndividualsThe Hume Highway runs between the capital cities of two adjacent states.
Thus it is present in one state and in the other. Call this a case of 'interstateidentity' if you like: a highway that runs through one state is identicalwith a highway that runs through the other, there is one highway thatruns through them both. But the states do not overlap thereby; they shareno (particular) part in common. The highway consists of parts, one partin one state and another in the other. It is partly in each state. The partsare not identical; they don't even overlap. But the highway which includesthe one part is identical with the highway which includes the other. Moresimply: there is a highway they are both parts of.
Likewise Hume (no relation) runs between 1711 and 1776. He ispresent in the early half of the century and in the later half. Call thisa case of 'identity over time' if you like: a man who runs through theearly years is identical with a man who runs through the later years,
there is one man who lives both early and late. But the times do not overlapthereby; they share no (particular) part in common. Hume consistsof parts, different parts in different times. He is partly in each of thetimes during his life. The parts of him are not identical; they don't evenoverlap. But the man which includes one part is identical with theman which includes the other. More simply: there is a man they are bothparts of.
Or so say I. (And he.) Of course this account of Hume's perdurancethrough time is controversial; many would favour the view that he endures,
wholly present at every time of his life, so that those times do overlapby having him as a shared part. That would be 'identity over time' ina truer sense. Such endurance may appeal to intuition, but - so I arguedin the previous section - it creates a disastrous problem about Hume'stemporary intrinsic properties. The enduring Hume, multiply located intime, turns out to be intrinsically shapeless; he bent-shapes one time, hestraight-shapes another, but these relations are no part of the way he is,
considered in himself. I call that a reductio. Likewise 'trans-world identity'in the truest sense - overlap of worlds - creates a disastrous problem aboutthe accidental intrinsic properties of the alleged common parts. But whenwe therefore reject overlap of worlds, we need not reject trans-worldidentity in the lesser sense which corresponds to the interstate identityof the Hume Highway or to (what I take to be) the identity over timeof Hume.
I shall argue that indeed there are things that enjoy trans-world identityin this sense. But then I shall argue that we ourselves, and other thingsthat we ordinarily name, or classify under predicates, or quantify over,
are not among them. So I oppose trans-world individuals not by denying

Against Trans-World Individuals211their existence - not when I quantify without restriction - but rather bydenying that they deserve our attention.
I do not deny the existence of trans-world individuals, and yet thereis a sense in which I say that they cannot possibly exist. As should beexpected, the sense in question involves restricted quantification. (See thediscussion of restricting modifiers in section 1.2.) It is possible forsomething to exist iff it is possible for the whole of it to exist. That is,
iff there is a world at which the whole of it exists. That is, iff there isa world such that, quantifying only over parts of that world, the wholeof it exists. That is, iff the whole of it is among the parts of some world.
That is, iff it is part of some world - and hence not a trans-worldindividual. Parts of worlds are possible individuals; trans-world individualsare therefore impossible individuals.
To call the trans-world individuals 'impossible' in this sense is not anargument for ignoring them - that comes later. It is only a terminologicalstipulation. If we thought they should not be ignored, perhaps becausewe thought that we ourselves were trans-world individuals, it would beappropriate and easy to give 'possible individual' a more inclusive sense.
We could say that an individual exists at a world iff, quantifying onlyover parts of that world, some part of that individual exists - that way,
the trans-world individuals would count as possible.8I claim that mereological composition is unrestricted: any old class ofthings has a mereological sum. Whenever there are some things, no matterhow disparate and unrelated, there is something composed of just thosethings. Even a class of things out of different worlds has a mereologicalsum. That sum is a trans-world individual. It overlaps each world thatcontributes a part of it, and so is partly in each of many worlds.
We are happy enough with mereological sums of things that contrastwith their surroundings more than they do with one another; and thatare adjacent, stick together, and act jointly. We are more reluctant toaffirm the existence of mereological sums of things that are disparateand scattered and go their separate ways. A typical problem case is a fleet:
the ships contrast with their surroundings more than with one another,
they act jointly, but they are not adjacent nor do they stick together. Aclass of things from different worlds might do well on the firstdesideratum, but it will fail miserably on the other three. Far from being'Indeed, I think that in this sense, there would be no impossible individuals. Noindividual is wholly distinct from all the worlds; so every individual is divisible into partswhich are parts of worlds. What of an individual that stands in none of the external relationsthat unify worlds? - According to what I said in section 1.6, it cannot be a worldmateof anything else; but without worldmates it can still be a world all on its own. Or, if itsparts are not suitably interrelated, it can divide into several individuals each of whichis a world all on its own.

212Counterparts or Double Lives?
adjacent, these things will not be spatiotemporally related in any way;
they can exert no cohesive forces whatever on one another, nor can theyhave any joint effects. (See section 1.6.) So if composition could berestricted in accordance with our intuitions about this-worldly cases, thendoubtless trans-world composition would fall under the ban.
But composition cannot be restricted in accordance with our intuitionsabout this-worldly cases, as I shall shortly argue. Therefore a ban on trans-
world composition, though unproblematic in itself, would be unmotivatedand gratuitious. The simple principle of absolutely unrestrictedcomposition should be accepted as true.9The trouble with restricted composition is as follows. It is a vague matterwhether a given class satisfies our intuitive desiderata for composition.
Each desideratum taken by itself is vague, and we get still more vaguenessby trading them off against each other. To restrict composition inaccordance with our intuitions would require a vague restriction. It's noton to say that somewhere we get just enough contrast with thesurroundings, just enough cohesion, . . . to cross a threshold and permitcomposition to take place, though if the candidate class had been justa little worse it would have remained sumless. But if composition obeysa vague restriction, then it must sometimes be a vague matter whethercomposition takes place or not. And that is impossible.
The only intelligible account of vagueness locates it in our thought andlanguage. The reason it's vague where the outback begins is not that there'sthis thing, the outback, with imprecise borders; rather there are manythings, with different borders, and nobody has been fool enough to tryto enforce a choice of one of them as the official referent of the word`outback' .1° Vagueness is semantic indecision. But not all of languageis vague. The truth-functional connectives aren't, for instance. Nor arethe words for identity and difference, and for the partial identity ofoverlap. Nor are the idioms of quantification, so long as they areunrestricted. How could any of these be vague? What would be thealternatives between which we haven't chosen?
The question whether composition takes place in a given case, whethera given class does or does not have a mereological sum, can be statedin a part of language where nothing is vague. Therefore it cannot havea vague answer. There is such a thing as the sum, or there isn't. It cannotbe said that, because the desiderata for composition are satisfied to aborderline degree, there sort of is and sort of isn't. What is this thing such9I really do mean absolutely unrestricted — for instance, I see no bar to compositionof'sets with individuals, or particulars with universals, or cats with numbers. But hereit will be enough to consider the composition of particular individuals.
101 realise that one can construct a so-called 'vague object' as a class of precise objects —
that is, objects simpliciter — and then quantify over these classes. I take that project tobe part of an analysis of vagueness in language, not an alternative to it.

Against Trans-World Individuals213that it sort of is so, and sort of isn't, that there is any such thing? Norestriction on composition can be vague. But unless it is vague, it cannotfit the intuitive desiderata. So no restriction on composition can servethe intuitions that motivate it. So restriction would be gratuitous.
Composition is unrestricted, and so there are trans-world individuals.
(To be sure, a ban against trans-world composition would not itselfbe a vague restriction, so it would not fall victim to the argumentjust given. But taken by itself it would be unmotivated. To motivateit, we have to subsume it under a broader restriction. Which can'tbe done, because a well-motivated broader restriction would bevague.)
Restrict quantifiers, not composition. Vague existence, speakingunrestrictedly, is unintelligible; vague existence, speaking restrictedly, isunproblematic. Is it so, ignoring things that don't measure up to certainstandards of unification of their parts, that this class has a mereologicalsum? Definitely yes, if the sum definitely does measure up; definitely no,
if it definitely doesn't; not definitely one way or the other, if the sumis a borderline case with respect to unification. There is a sum,
unrestrictedly speaking, but it can perfectly well be a vague matter whetherthis sum falls within a vaguely restricted domain of quantification.
Speaking restrictedly, of course we can have our intuitively motivatedrestrictions on composition. But not because composition ever fails totake place; rather, because we sometimes ignore some of all the thingsthere really are.
We have no name for the mereological sum of the right half of myleft shoe plus the Moon plus the sum of all Her Majesty's ear-rings, exceptfor the long and clumsy name I just gave it; we have no predicates underwhich such entities fall, except for technical terms like 'physical object'
(in a special sense known to some philosophers) or blanket terms like`entity' and maybe `thing'; we seldom admit it to our domains of restrictedquantification. It is very sensible to ignore such a thing in our everydaythought and language. But ignoring it won't make it go away. And reallymaking it go away without making too much else go away as well - thatis, holding a theory according to which classes have mereological sumsonly when we intuitively want them to - turns out not to be feasible.
If unrestricted composition is granted, I can reformulate counterparttheory in terms of trans-world individuals. This will begin as an exercisein definition-mongering, nothing more. For the time being, I shall continueto suppose that ordinary individuals - we ourselves, and other things wehave ordinary names and predicates and quantified variables for - neverexist at more than one world. Of course an ordinary individual will existaccording to other worlds, thanks to its other-worldly counterparts. Still,
it is a part of one world only, and neither the whole nor any (particular)

214Counterparts or Double Lives?
part of it is part of any other world. In short: my usual doctrines. Onlythe formulation will change.
(Almost my usual doctrines. For simplicity I shall impose one extraassumption: that the counterpart relation is symmetric. Also, I shall leaveone assumption in force that I would sometimes be willing to drop: thatnothing is a counterpart of anything else in its own world. I take bothof these assumptions to be correct for some but not all reasonablecandidate counterpart relations, so that imposing them amounts tosomewhat narrowing down what the counterpart relation might be, andthus giving up a little of the built-in flexibility of counterpart theory.)
As suggested above, let us call an individual which is wholly part ofone world a possible individual." If a possible individual X is part ofa trans-world individual Y, and X is not a proper part of any other possibleindividual that is part of Y, let us call X a stage of Y. The stages of atrans-world individual are its maximal possible parts; they are theintersections of it with the worlds which it overlaps. It has at most onestage per world, and it is the mereological sum of its stages. Sometimesone stage of a trans-world individual will be a counterpart of another.
If all stages of a trans-world individual Y are counterparts of one another,
let us call Y counterpart-interrelated. If Y is counterpart-interrelated, andnot a proper part of any other counterpart-interrelated trans-worldindividual (that is, if Y is maximal counterpart-interrelated), then let uscall Y a *-possible individual.
Given any predicate that applies to possible individuals, we can definea corresponding starred predicate that applies to *-possible individualsrelative to worlds. A *-possible individual is a *-man at W iff it has astage at W that is a man; it *-wins the presidency at W iff it has a stageat W that wins the presidency; it is a *-ordinary individual at W iff ithas a stage at W that is an ordinary individual. It *-exists at world Wiff it has a stage at W that exists; likewise it *-exists in its entirety at worldW iff it has a stage at W that exists its entirety, so - since any stage atany world does exist in its entirety - a *-possible individual *-exists inits entirety at any world where it *-exists at all. (Even though it does notexist in its entirety at any world.) It *-is not a trans-world individual atW iff it has a stage at W that is not a trans-world individual, so every*-possible individual (although it is a trans-world individual) also *-is nota trans-world individual at any world. It is a *-possible individual at W iffit has a stage at W that is a possible individual, so something is a *-possibleindividual simpliciter iff it is a *-possible individual at every world whereit *-exists. Likewise for relations. One *-possible individual *-kicks another"I avoid the convenient phrase 'world-bound individual' because it often seems tomean an individual that exists according to one world only, and I very much doubt thatthere are any such individuals.

Against Trans-World Individuals215at world W iff a stage at W of the first kicks a stage at W of the second;
two *-possible individuals are *-identical at W iff a stage at W of thefirst is identical to a stage at W of the second; and so on.
Two further conventions for the starred language. I shall often omit`at W' when the world in question is ours; and I shall use starred pronounsas variables over *-possible individuals, saying, as it might be, that ifone *-man *-kicks *-another then the *-latter *-kicks *-him back.
To any name of a possible individual, there corresponds a predicate:
`Humphrey' and 'is Humphrey', or 'Socrates' and `Socratises'. Ourschema for defining starred predicates applies as much to these predicatesas to any other. A *-possible individual *-is Humphrey at W iff it hasa stage at W that is Humphrey. If 'Humphrey' names our Humphreyand not his other-worldly counterparts, this means that a *-possibleindividual *-is Humphrey iff Humphrey is its stage at the actual world.
We could try defining names for *-possible individuals, saying for instancethat *-Humphrey is the one that *-is Humphrey. The problem is that,
since Humphrey has twin counterparts at some worlds, many differentpossible individuals *-are Humphrey, and so are equally candidates tobear the name `*-Humphrey'. We can say in the plural that all of themare *-Humphreys. As for the name in the singular, let us regard it asambiguous: its different disambiguations make it name different*-Humphreys. But often its ambiguity will not matter. The *-Humphreys,
though different, are all *-identical at this world. Therefore all or noneof them are *-men at this world, all or none of them *-win the presidencyat this world, and so on. The things we might say using the starred namein non-modal contexts will have the same truth value on alldisambiguations. Such a sentence is true, or is false, for every way ofdisambiguating its starred names. (For short: every way.) For instanceit is true, every way, that *-Humphrey is a *-man. It is false, every way,
that *-Humphrey *-wins.
As for modal contexts, we should note that two possible individualsare counterparts iff there is some *-possible individual of which they bothare stages. (Here I use the two simplifying assumptions I imposed on thecounterpart relation.) Then Humphrey has some other-worldly stage asa counterpart iff, for some way of disambiguating the starred name (forshort: some way) that stage belongs to *-Humphrey. I would ordinarilysay that Humphrey might have won iff he has some counterpart whowins; and that he is essentially a man iff all his counterparts are men.
Now I can say, equivalently, that Humphrey might have won iff, someway, there is a world where *-Humphrey *-wins; and he is essentiallya man iff, every way, *-Humphrey is a *-man at every world where *-he*-exists.
But 'might have won' and 'is essentially a man' are predicates that applyto possible individuals. So we can star them: a *-possible individual *-might

216Counterparts or Double Lives?
have won at world W iff it has a stage at W that might have won; a*-possible individual is *-essentially a man at world W iff it has a stagethere that is essentially a man. Now we can say that *-Humphrey mighthave won iff, some way, there is a world where *-Humphrey *-wins; and*-Humphrey is *-essentially a man iff, every way, *-Humphrey is a *-manat every world where *-he *-exists.
We have very little remaining use for the unstarred predicates and namesand pronouns of ordinary things, since we can use the starred vocabularyeven when talking entirely about what goes on at this world.12 At thispoint somebody - as it might be, the long-suffering compositor - mightbe heard to suggest a new convention for our language, at least whenit is used outside the philosophy room: leave off all the stars. Do it: thenhere are some doctrines I take to be true.
Humphrey is a possible individual; he is an ordinary individual; he isnot a trans-world individual. He exists; he exists at many worlds; heexists in his entirety at any world where he exists at all. He is a man;
he is essentially a man because, every way, he is a man at every worldwhere he exists. He lost; but he might have won because, some way,
there is a world where he wins. Every way, Humphrey is identical toHumphrey. But, some way, there are some worlds where Humphreyis not identical to Humphrey.
I dare say a fan of 'trans-world identity' might like this new theory betterthan he liked counterpart theory. That would be a mistake. It iscounterpart theory.13 New terminology is not a new theory. Saying thata horse's tail is a leg does not make five-legged horses. Saying thatHumphrey exists in his entirety at many worlds does not make overlapof worlds. I told you just what my words were meant to mean, and I'mtheir master, so you needn't hope that really they mean something else.
'2At this point, we have something resembling various systems of quantified modallogic that quantify over individual concepts: functions from worlds to individuals. Carnap'sMeaning and Necessity system is of this kind; but there is more of a resemblance to latersystems that quantify only over certain selected individual concepts. See, for instance,
Kaplan, `Transworld Heir Lines'; Thomason, 'Modal Logic and Metaphysics' (the systemQ3); Gibbard, 'Contingent Identity'; and many papers by Hintikka from the sixties andseventies. If worlds never overlap, then there is a one-to-one correspondence between mytrans-world individuals and functions from worlds to parts of themselves. So if thosefunctions were the only individual concepts we wanted to quantify over, we might as wellreplace set-theoretic construction by mereology. It is sometimes hard to tell how thesesystems are meant to be understood - whether ordinary things are supposed to be the world-
to-individual functions or the values of those functions, whether the worlds or theindividuals or both are supposed to be ersatz.
'3Plus unrestricted composition, plus two slightly restrictive assumptions on thecounterpart relation.

Against Trans-World Individuals217There's a question whether this fan of trans-world identity ought tolike counterpart theory any better when he finds out how it can be restated.
Probably not. Sometimes it can indeed enhance the plausibility of a theoryto gain verbal agreement with what opponents want to say, even at thecost of a bit of gentle reinterpretation, but in the case at hand thereinterpretation is much too violent to buy any plausibility. Further, ifwhat's wanted is trans-world identity, I have all along agreed to it in theuncontroversial sense: Humphrey - he himself, the whole of him - exists(in his entirety) according to many worlds. Many worlds represent de reof him that he exists. They do it by counterparts, but they do it. Thisis a less devious way to give the fan what he says he wants.
So far, counterpart theory reworded, first harmlessly and thendeceptively. But now someone might say that I have made one mistake,
as follows. When I worked my way around to the starless abbreviationof the starred language, I did not forge a deceptive imitation of ourordinary language. Rather, that was our ordinary language. I returnedhome and knew the place for the first time. We ourselves, and other thingsthat we ordinarily name, or classify under predicates, or quantify over,
are trans-world individuals unified by counterpart relations. It is quitewrong to ignore such things; we would be ignoring, inter alia, ourselves.
If anything, it is the stages that we should ignore and leave out of ourrestricted quantifying.
The theory that ordinary things are trans-world individuals, unifiedby counterpart relations among their stages, really is a different theoryfrom mine. But the difference is limited. There is no disagreement aboutwhat there is; there is no disagreement about the analysis of modality.
Rather, there is extensive semantic disagreement. It is a disagreement aboutwhich of the things my opponent and I both believe in are rightly calledpersons, or sticks, or stones.
In his 'Worlds Away', Quine portrays a form of modal realism that treatsordinary things as trans-world individuals, perduring through non-
overlapping worlds in just the way they perdure through time and space.
It isn't that he advocates such a view; rather, he takes for granted thatthis is what modal realism would be.14 The reason is that he takes theanalogy of time and modality as his guide. In the case of time we donot think of ourselves as momentary stages, but rather as trans-time sumsof stages. (I agree.) So we should say the same in the case of modality.
(Why?) But it turns out that the analogy is not so very good after all;
14'Worlds Away' appears to be about genuine modal realism. There is no connectionwith the mathematical construction of ersatz worlds he had considered in 'PropositionalObjects' (see section 3.2), unless it be a subterranean connection by way of Pythagoreanreduction and ontological relativity.

218Counterparts or Double Lives?
the unification of the sums is much more problematic for modality thanit is for time. (Again I agree.) So much the worse for modal realism. (No -
so much the worse for following the analogy wherever it may lead.)
Grant me, what is controversial, that we perdure through time by havingdistinct temporal stages at different times; else Quine's analogy of timeand modality doesn't even begin. (Then if in addition we are trans-worldindividuals, there is a double summation: we are composed of stages atdifferent worlds, which stages in turn are composed of stages at differenttimes within the same world. And of course those are composed in turnof spatial parts.) Even so, the unification of the sums would be moreproblematic for modality than it is for time, in three different ways.
(1)The temporal parts of an ordinary thing that perdures through timeare united as much by relations of causal dependence as by qualitativesimilarity. In fact, both work together: the reason the thing changes onlygradually, for the most part, is that the way it is at any time dependscausally on the way it was at the time just before, and this dependenceis by and large conservative. However, there can be no trans-worldcausation to unite counterparts. Their unification into a trans-worldindividual can only be by similarity.
(2)To the extent that unification by similarity does enter into perdurancethrough time, what matters is not so much the long-range similaritybetween separated stages, but rather the linkage of separated stages bymany steps of short-range similarity between close stages in a one-
dimensional ordering. Change is mostly gradual, but not much limitedoverall. There is no such one-dimensional ordering given in the modalcase. So any path is as good as any other; and what's more, in logicalspace anything that can happen does. So linkage by a chain of short stepsis too easy: it will take us more or less from anywhere to anywhere.
Therefore it must be disregarded; the unification of trans-world individualsmust be a matter of direct similarity between the stages. (Quine rests hisobjection on this point.)
(3) In the case of temporal perdurance, it is possible to get pathologicalcases: fission, fusion, and people who gradually turn into different people.
These arise when the relation that unites the stages is intransitive, so thatdifferent perduring people overlap. Then what do we say when a stageshared between two (or more) people is present? Strictly speaking, twopeople are present there by way of that one stage, but the fact that thereare two is extrinsic to the time in question. It seems for all the worldthat there is only one. We will have to say something counter-intuitive,
but we get a choice of evils. We could say that there are two people; orthat there is one, but really we're counting stages rather than people; orthat there is one, and we're counting people, but we're not counting allthe people who are present; or that there is one, and we're counting people,
but we're not counting them by identity. (See my 'Survival and Identity'.)

Against Trans-World Individuals219It really isn't nice to have to say any of these things - but after all, we'retalking about something that doesn't really ever happen to people exceptin science fiction stories and philosophy examples, so is it really so verybad that peculiar cases have to get described in peculiar ways? We getby because ordinary cases are not pathological. But modality is different:
pathology is everywhere. Whenever something in this world has twocounterparts that are not counterparts of each other, we get two differentmaximal counterpart-interrelated trans-world individuals which share acommon stage at this world. That could happen because the this-worldlystage has twin counterparts at some world - and I'd like to know howanything could ever fail to have twin counterparts somewhere, exceptunder some very restrictive notion about what eligible candidates for acounterpart relation there are. Or it could happen still more easily thatsomething has two counterparts at different worlds that are notcounterparts of each other. The counterpart relation is a matter of somesort of similarity, little differences add up to big differences, so of coursethere is intransitivity. So the modal case will always, or almost always,
give us the same choice of evils about how to count that the temporalcase gives us only in connection with far-fetched stories. If trans-worldindividuals are oddities we mostly ignore, no harm done if we have puzzlesabout how to count them from the standpoint of a world where they sharestages. But if they are said to be ordinary things that we cannot ignore,
then these puzzles are much more obnoxious.
These three considerations are general. They apply against the doctrinethat we ourselves are trans-world individuals, and equally against thedoctrine that sticks and stones are trans-world individuals. But in the caseof ourselves, there is a fourth consideration. Consider the various desiresof my various temporal stages in this world. They differ, of course; butthere is plenty of common purpose to it. To some extent, stages wantto fulfil the remembered desires of earlier stages: I strive for somethingtoday mainly because I wanted it yesterday. That is what it means notto be a quitter. To a greater extent, stages want to fulfil the foreseen desiresof later stages: that is prudence. It isn't quite all for one and one forall, of course - how I envy my future self who is sending this manuscriptaway! - but it is so to a great extent. Even if it is in the first instancethe momentary stages that do the desiring, still a person perduring throughtime is capable of collective self-interest. Not so across worlds. My this-
worldly self has no tendency to make the purposes of its other-worldlycounterparts its own. Far from wishing good fortune to all the counterpartsalike, what it wants is that it should be one of the most fortunate amongthem. There is no common purpose. The supposed trans-world person,
no matter how well unified by counterpart relations, is not the sort ofintegrated self that is capable of self-interest. How could it be, in viewof the absolute lack of causal connection between its parts, and the

220Counterparts or Double Lives?
non-contingency of its total allotment of good and ill fortune? It wouldbe strange and pointless to think of the trans-world sums in the way weare accustomed to think of ourselves. That is further reason to set thetrans-world individuals aside as oddities best ignored.
The final, and simplest, reason is that a modal realism which makesordinary things out to be trans-world individuals disagrees gratuitouslywith common opinion. After all, not all of us are modal realists; andthose who are not (even the ersatzers) couldn't possibly think of ordinarythings as having parts in many worlds. Surely it is better for modal realistsif they can think of people, sticks, and stones exactly as others do.
4.4 Against HaecceitismDavid Kaplan introduced the term `haecceitism' in the following famouspassage.
There seems to be some disagreement as to whether we can meaningfullyask whether a possible individual that exists in one possible world also existsin another without taking into account the attributes and behavior of theindividuals that exist in the one world and making a comparison with theattributes and behavior of the individuals that exist in the other world.
The doctrine that holds that it does make sense to ask — without referenceto common attributes and behavior — whether this is the same individualin another possible world, that individuals can be extended in logical space(i.e. through possible worlds) in much the way we commonly regard themas being extended in physical space and time, and that a common `thisness'may underlie extreme dissimilarity or distinct thisnesses may underlie greatresemblance, I call Haecceitism . . . . The opposite view, Anti-Haecceitism,
holds that for entities of distinct possible worlds there is no notion oftransworld being. They may, of course, be linked by a common concept —
as Eisenhower and Nixon are linked across two moments of time by theconcept the president of the United States and distinguished, at the samepair of moments, by the concept the most respected member of his party —
but there are, in general, many concepts linking any such pair and manydistinguishing them. Each, in his own setting, may be clothed in attributeswhich cause them to resemble one another closely. But there is nometaphysical reality of sameness or difference which underlies the clothes.
Our interests may cause us to identify individuals of distinct worlds, butthen we are creating something — a transworld continuant — of a kinddifferent fom anything given by the metaphysics. Although the Anti-
Haecceitist may seem to assert that no possible individual exists in morethan one possible world, that view is properly reserved for the Haecceitistwho holds to an unusually rigid brand of metaphysical determinism. (`Howto Russell a Frege-Church', pages 722-3; Loux, pages 216-17.)

Against Haecceitism 221I consider myself to be an anti-haecceitist in more or less the sense thatKaplan had in mind. I also think it is worth holding on to the term, whichhas gained some currency. But before we go on, it is necessary to pullout the main haecceitist doctrine from Kaplan's rather large bundle ofviews.
The main doctrine, I take it, is the denial of a supervenience thesis.
All hands agree in distinguishing two ways that worlds - genuine or ersatz -
might differ. (1) Worlds might differ in their qualitative character; or,
for ersatz worlds, in the qualitative character they ascribe to the concreteworld. That is to say, they might exhibit or represent different patternsof instantiation of the natural intrinsic properties and external relations,
and might thus disagree about just what kinds of things there are or abouthow things of the various kinds are spatiotemporally arranged and causallyrelated.15 Suppose we had a mighty language that lacked for nothing inthe way of qualitative predicates, and lacked for nothing in its resourcesfor complex infinitary constructions, but was entirely devoid of propernames for things; then the qualitative differences would be those thatcould be captured by descriptions in this mighty language. (2) Also, worldsmight differ in what they represent de re concerning various individuals:
this-worldly individuals at least, and also other-worldly individuals if suchthere be. Thus, whatever account we might give of representation de reby genuine or ersatz worlds, it remains that there are some of them whichrepresent de re, of Humphrey (the Humphrey of our world), that he winsthe presidency and there are others that represent, of him, that he loses.
What is the connection between these two ways for worlds to differ? Doesrepresentation de re supervene on qualitative character? Is it so thatwhenever two worlds differ in representation de re, that is because theydiffer qualitatively? Or are there sometimess differences in representationde re without benefit of any difference whatever in qualitative character?
If two worlds differ in what they represent de re concerning someindividual, but do not differ qualitatively in any way, I shall call thata haecceitistic difference. Haecceitism, as I propose to use the word, isthe doctrine that there are at least some cases of haecceitistic differencebetween worlds. Anti-haecceitism is the doctrine that there are none.
If that's what the issue before us is, then there are many things thatit is not. It will be instructive to distinguish some separable questions,
lest we underestimate the range of alternative positions that are availableto us.
IsHere I count causal relationships as a matter of 'qualitative character'; it may or maynot be that they supervene on qualitative character more narrowly defined, in particularon the point-by-point distribution of local qualitative character. I discuss this questionin the Introduction to my Philosophical Papers, volume II.

222Counterparts or Double Lives?
(1) Haecceitism is not the doctrine of trans-world identity in theuncontroversial sense: the claim that sometimes many (genuine or ersatz)
worlds represent de re, concerning one and the same individual, that itexists and it does this or that. That much would be so whether or notrepresentation de re supervenes on qualitative character. Likewise, the`unusually rigid brand of determinism', which would deny that the samething ever exists according to many worlds, is not anti-haecceitism. (Itisn't a form of haecceitism either, on my definition, unless it is conjoinedwith a claim that there are qualitatively indiscernible worlds.)
Still less is haecceitism a mere acknowledgement of representation dere as a legitimate notion, one that we are entitled to use without qualmswhen we classify worlds and stipulate which of them we want to consider.
So when Kripke emphatically insists16 that it is entirely legitimate andproper to specify worlds by making reference to individuals - call thisKripkean specification - he is not entering into any debate over (what Icall) haecceitism, and no anti-haecceitist need hesitate to agree with him.
Similarly, we can all agree that it is proper to specify one out of a packof dogs as 'the ugly one' without thereby entering into any debate overwhether aesthetic properties do or do not supervene on shape andcolouration.
Anti-haecceitism does indeed imply that any Kripkean specification ofworlds could in principle be replaced by a qualitative specification - butnot that this replacement is something that the Kripkean specifier hadin mind, or something it is feasible to discover, or even something thatcould be expressed in finitely many words. Even if anti-haecceitism istrue, there are two different reasons why we should expect Kripkeanspecifications to remain indispensable in practice. One reason is just thatsupervenience falls short of finite definability, to say nothing ofmanageably concise definability. The other reason is that Kripkeanspecification, understood as an anti-haecceitist would understand it, makesimplicit reference to the not-fully-known qualitative character of this-
worldly things. An analogy: consider the class of men wealthier than theShah of Iran ever was. I have succeeded in specifying a class of men;
that same class could have been specified in terms of net worth in dollars;
but since the exact wealth of the Shah was a well-kept secret, I cannotsubstitute the second specification for the first. The same will happenif I specify the class of men whose intrinsic and extrinsic qualitativecharacter bears a certain relation to the not-fully-known actual qualitativecharacter of Humphrey; or if I specify the class of worlds where suchmen win the presidency, which last is Kripkean specification understoodin the anti-haecceitist way.
Kripkean specification is both legitimate and indispensable. No issue16As in Naming and Necessity, pages 44-7.

Against Haecceitism223there. But if anyone purports to distinguish qualitatively indistinguishableworlds by means of Kripkean specification, then and only then must theanti-haecceitist object. And even then, he needn't object to Kripkeanspecification per se. He can continue to tolerate it, as we shall see, andobject rather to the presupposition that what gets specified must be apossible world.
(2)Haecceitism also is not the doctrine of trans-world identity in thecontroversial sense that we considered in section 4.2: overlap of worlds.
One way to be a haecceitist would be to accept a plurality of overlappingworlds, and to give an account of haecceitistic differences in terms ofthe common parts of different worlds. But there are other ways. Morelikely, a haecceitist will be some sort of ersatzer. His ersatz worlds maydiffer haecceitistically in what they say about Humphrey, but Humphreyhimself will not be a common part of the ersatz worlds that disagree abouthim. Or if he is, that will be only in the irrelevant way that one wordmight be common to many texts.
(3)We might state anti-haecceitism as the doctrine that representationde re is determined by qualitative character. But we shouldn't take thatto mean that representation de re is fully determined by anything. Thedoctrine only says that insofar as there is determinacy at all, it is qualitativecharacter that does the job; where determinacy in virtue of qualitativecharacter gives out, there determinacy itself gives out. Haecceitism claimsthat some non-qualitative aspect of worlds makes at least somecontribution to determining representation de re; anti-haecceitism deniesit. That is one question. The extent of determinacy is another.
The point applies to supervenience theses generally. If as a materialistI say that mental facts are entirely determined by physical facts (if weset aside worlds endowed with properties alien to our world), I needn'tinsist that mental facts are entirely determined. I can admit that there'sno right answer to the question whether fuddled Fred loves or hates hisfather. What would make it so that he loves or that he hates is that oneor another eligible assignment of content would best fit the physical facts;
but in Fred's case two systems fit equally well, and well enough, and betterthan their eligible competitors, and according to one he loves and accordingto the other he hates; so what the physical facts make true is not thathe loves or that he hates, but rather that he is in a state of befuddlementand indeterminacy that cannot straightforwardly be called the onething or the other. We have not settled what such a condition as Fred'sought to be called. So Fred's story, as told in the language of simplisticfolk psychology, is riddled with truth-value gaps left by our semanticindecision. No worries for materialism: it remains that the whole mentaltruth, such of it as there is, supervenes on the physics. Something elsesupervenes on the physics too: the whole truth about what the range ofindeterminacy is, about whether a given simplistic mental description does

224Counterparts or Double Lives?
or does not fall in the class within which there is no uniquely rightchoice.
No matter how representation de re is determined, whether byqualitative character or by non-qualitative determinants or some of each,
the question of determinancy is still with us. The questions are linkedonly to this extent. Among various alternative theories of the nature of(genuine or ersatz) worlds and of representation de re, it might turn outthat the ones that permit haecceitistic differences also imply something(welcome or unwelcome) about the extent of determinacy; and likewisefor the ones that rule out haecceitistic differences. We shall take up thequestion of determinacy in the next section.
(4) Anti-haecceitism does not imply any doctrine of identity ofindiscernibles. We do have a converse implication: if we never have twoworlds exactly alike in qualitative character, then a fortiori we neverhave two such worlds that differ in representation de re, so anti-
haecceitism follows automatically. But anti-haecceitism is neutral aboutwhether there are qualitatively indiscernible worlds: there can beany number of indiscernible worlds, so long as they are alike not onlyqualitatively but also in representation de re. If worlds are alike in bothof these respects, perhaps they are altogether indiscernible - how else mightthey differ?
For all I know, there are many indiscernible worlds, so that the worldsare even more abundant than we would otherwise think. I see no theoreticalbenefits to be gained by supposing that there are or that there are not,
so on this question I advise that we remain agnostic.17If we consider not genuine but ersatz worlds, we must take care whatwe mean in saying that identity of indiscernibles implies anti-haecceitism.
For remember that the relevant qualitative character of an ersatz worldis not the qualitative character which that ersatz world itself has; rather,
it is the qualitative character which that ersatz world ascribes, truly orfalsely, to the concrete world. If all ersatz worlds alike are abstract simpleswith no qualitative character to speak of, they may yet differ qualitativelyin the relevant sense if somehow they manage to represent the concreteworld differently. Or if the ersatz worlds are linguistic constructions, two171 am inclined to agree with Unger Winimizing Arbitrariness', page 47) that we havereason to reject hypotheses that involve gratuitous arbitrariness, and thereby suggest —
unacceptably — that the geography of logical space is a contingent matter. For instance,
we may reject the obnoxiously arbitrary hypothesis that each world has exactly seventeen,
or exactly aleph-seventeen, indiscernible duplicates; or the hypothesis that nice worldshave more duplicates than nasty ones. But the hypothesis that there is no duplication atall is not obnoxiously arbitrary; and neither is the hypothesis that all worlds alike areinfinitely reduplicated to the same extent, provided we do not specify some obnoxiouslyarbitary infinite cardinal. So the principle of rejecting arbitrariness does not tell us whetheror not there are indiscernible worlds.

Against Haecceitism 225of them might differ in the order of their clauses, their choice betweensynonyms, or what have you,18 and nevertheless might be entirelyequivalent in what they say about the qualitative character of theconcrete world. So the sort of identity of indiscernible ersatz worlds whichwould be sufficient but not necessary for anti-haecceitism wouldhave little to do with issues of identity of indiscernibles as ordinarilyunderstood.
(5)Despite its name, haecceitism is not the acceptance of haecceities:
non-qualitative properties of `thisness' which distinguish particularindividuals.19 One might indeed expound haecceitism in terms ofhaecceities, saying that when two worlds differ haecceitistically, theydisagree about which haecceities are coinstantiated with which qualitativeproperties. But a haecceitist need not believe in non-qualitativeproperties. He might even be some kind of nominalist and reject propertiesaltogether.
In the other direction, you don't have to be a haecceitist to believe inhaecceities. I am no haecceitist; but I hold that (on one legitimateconception of properties among others - see section 1.5) there is a propertyfor any set whatever of possible individuals. This property I identify withthe set itself. So we get properties that are in no way qualitativelydelineated, and some of these are haecceities of this- and other-worldlyindividuals. A unit set of an individual is one especially strict sort ofhaecceity. Also, for any individual and any counterpart relation, thereis the set of that individual together with all its counterparts, and thisis a less strict sort of haecceity.
(6)Anti-haecceitism, properly speaking does not imply anti-haecceitismfor less-than-maximally-specific `miniworlds'. For many limited purposesit is convenient and perfectly harmless to conflate possible worlds, ignoringsome respects of difference between them. For genuine modal realism,
the miniworlds thus abstracted might be bigger things than the worldsthemselves: they might be equivalence classes consisting of worlds thatdiffer only in the ignored respects. For linguistic ersatzism, the miniworldsmight be smaller things: they might be abridged linguistic descriptions,
as opposed to the complete descriptions which are the ersatz worldsthemselves. (For pictorial ersatzism they would again be equivalenceclasses; for magical ersatzism they would be less-than-maximal elementsof the algebra of abstract simples.) Kripke gives us an elementary examplefrom school:
18Whether this could happen depends on details of the construction. The maximalconsistency of ersatz worlds might or might not mean that each one says everything ithas to say in all different ways that its language affords.
I9See Adams, 'Primitive Thisness and Primitive Identity', for further discussion of thedifference between these questions.

226Counterparts or Double Lives?
Two ordinary dice . . . are thrown, displaying two numbers face up. Foreach die, there are six possible results. Hence there are thirty-six possiblestates of the pair of dice, as far as the numbers shown face-up areconcerned, though only one of these states corresponds to the way thedice actually will come out. We all learned in school how to computethe probabilities of various events (assuming equiprobability of thestates). . . . Now in doing these school exercises in probability, we werein fact introduced at a tender age to a set of (miniature) 'possible worlds'.
The thirty-six possible states of the dice are literally thirty-six 'possibleworlds', as long as we (fictively) ignore everything about the world exceptthe two dice and what they show. . . . Now in this elementary case, certainconfusions can be avoided. . . . The thirty-six possibilities, the one thatis actual included, are (abstract) states of the dice, not complex physicalentities. Nor should any school pupil receive high marks for the question`How do we know, in the state where die A is six and die B is five, whetherit is die A or die B which is six? Don't we need a "criterion of transstateidentity" to identify the die with a six — not the die with a five — with ourdie A?' The answer is, of course, that the state (die A, 6; die B, 5) is givenas such (and distinguished from the state (die B, 6; die A, 5)). The demandfor some further 'criterion of transstate identity' is so confused that nocompetent schoolchild would be so perversely philosophical as to makeit. The 'possibilities' simply are not given qualitatively . . . . If they hadbeen, there would have been just twenty-one distinct possibilities, not thirty-
six. (Preface to Naming and Necessity, pages 16-17.)
I do not take issue with any of this (except that I would give thephilosophical pupil high marks despite the error of his ways). I too couldbe an ersatzer for this simple case, since it is no problem to devise aworldmaking language with resources enough to distinguish theseminiworlds and with a purely syntactic test for consistency. Its sentencesmight as well take the very form illustrated in the quotation: 'die A, 6;
die B, 5' and so forth. I too would be happy to specify the thirty-sixminiworlds in terms of what they represent de re concerning each of thetwo dice. By so doing, I too would gladly distinguish miniworlds withoutbenefit of any qualitative difference - except, of course, for the countlessrespects of qualitative differences that we have agreed to ignore, suchas differences having to do with the different origins and histories andlocations and exact size and shape of the two dice.
But what has any of this to do with any controversy in metaphysics?
If ignoring is our game, we can ignore what we will and attend to whatwe will. Nothing stands in the way of ignoring underlying differenceswhile attending to other differences that supervene on them - in whichcase the supervenience of the latter will be part of what we are ignoring.
The mental may supervene on the physical, in fact I am convinced thatit does, yet sometimes I manage to attend to the mental lives of peoplewhile ignoring the physics of them. Representation de re may supervene

Against Haecceitism227on qualitative character, in fact I am sure that it does, yet that is no reasonwhy we may not attend to the former, ignore the latter, conflate worldsthat agree in representation de re but differ qualitatively, and specify theseconflations in the appropriate non-qualitative terms. We may; and we do.
You may have been under the impression that Kripke and I are the arch-
haecceitist versus the arch-anti-haecceitist. (I myself have sometimes beenunder that impression.) It isn't so. Kripke vigorously defends doctrinesloosely associated with (what I call) haecceitism; but I accept thosedoctrines too, and if that is enough to make one a `haecceitist' then weare all haecceitists together and a useful term needs to be scrapped andreplaced. As for the main issue, haecceitistic differences between worlds,
I reject them and Kripke does not accept them. He only rejects a reasonto reject them. Apart from that, he is explicitly neutral.
With respect to possible states of the entire world, I do not mean to assertcategorically that, just as in the case of the dice, there are qualitativelyidentical but distinct (counterfactual) states. What I do assert is that if thereis a philosophical argument excluding qualitatively identical but distinctworlds, it cannot be based simply on the supposition that worlds must bestipulated purely qualitatively. What I defend is the propriety of givingpossible worlds in terms of certain particulars as well as qualitatively,
whether or not there are in fact qualitatively identical worlds. (Preface toNaming and Necessity, page 18.)
I read this as a declaration of neutrality about haecceitism because I takeKripke to assume that the 'qualitatively identical but distinct worlds' inquestion would be worlds that differed haecceitistically, rather than distinctworlds that differed in no way at all. Given his insistence that the worldsare in some sense 'abstract', he has every reason to set the second caseaside.
The principal thing to say in favour of haecceitism is just that we do seemto have some intuitively compelling cases of haecceitistic difference.
Suppose, for instance, that ours is a world of one-way eternal recurrencewith a first epoch but no last. One of the epochs is ours. Which epoch? —
there seem to be many possibilities, one of which is the actual one. Perhapsour epoch is in fact the seventeenth; but we might instead have lived inthe 137th epoch. So it seems that there is a possible world that isqualitatively just like ours — the same infinite sequence of epochs, allexactly alike, and exactly like the epochs of our world — but that representsde re, concerning us, that we live in the 137th epoch rather than theseventeenth. Then the difference between that world and ours is ahaecceitistic difference. No matter that ours is perhaps not really a world

228Counterparts or Double Lives?
of eternal recurrence. For haecceitism concerns not our world alonebut all the worlds, wherefore it is not contingent on which worldis ours.
The principal thing to say against haecceitism is just that when we surveythe various forms of genuine or ersatz modal realism, we find that theones that are congenial to haecceitistic differences are the ones that wehave already seen to be in serious trouble on other grounds. What's more,
it turns out that there is a cheap substitute for haecceitism. We can givethe haecceitist differences very like the ones he wanted, but without gettinginto trouble by taking them to be haecceitistic differences between worlds.
So we should reject haecceitism not for any very direct reason, but ratherbecause its intuitive advantage over the cheap substitute - if indeed it hasany advantage at all - costs us far more trouble than it's worth.
To begin. First, genuine modal realism with overlap of worlds iscongenial to haecceitistic differences. There is no reason why proponentsof this view - if there were any - should not accept haecceitism.
Haecceitistic differences can be explained in terms of the differing partsof qualitatively indiscernible worlds. Just as two duplicate strings mayshare a dot though one puts it in the middle and the other puts it at one endso it might happen that two duplicate worlds share an individual thoughone puts him in the seventeenth epoch and the other puts him in the 137th;
and thereby those two worlds could differ in what they represent de reabout which epoch is his. And just as our shared dot may be no partof a third stringwhich duplicates the first two, so our shared individual might be no partof a third world which duplicates the first two; and thereby that thirdworld represents de re of him that he does not exist at all. If representationde re works by overlap, haecceitistic differences are not a problem. Theyare only to be expected. You can have your haecceitism, but you haveto pay: wherever there seem to be contingent intrinsic properties of things,
you have to say that the seeming property is really a relation. The intrinsicnature of the things that stand in these new-found relations is shroudedin mystery. That was my main argument against overlap (in section 4.2)
and I think it is worse trouble than haecceitism is worth.

Against Haecceitism 229Next, consider modal realism without overlap of worlds. This is thetheory I favour; I considered the drawbacks of overlap in section 4.2,
and the drawbacks of various versions of ersatzism in chapter 3. But ifit is preferred, then haecceitistic differences of worlds become utterlymysterious.20I ask what the non-qualitative determinants of representation de re are,
and how they do their work. A haecceitist who believed in overlap wouldhave had a good answer, but if he gives up on overlap, he throws thatanswer away and he owes me another. Somehow, non-qualitative aspectsof things and worlds are supposed to be relevant to what is representedde re concerning other things in other worlds. For instance, a winner ispart of some world that does not overlap ours, and thereby it is representedde re, concerning Humphrey, that he might have won. Ex hypothesi, thistrans-world relevance is not identity; because we have given up on overlap.
It is a relation which relates distinct things in distinct worlds. Ex hypothesiit is not (or not entirely) a qualitative counterpart relation of the sortthat I favour; because we want haecceitism. So what is it? Call it a non-
qualitative counterpart relation - that label will do to be going on with,
though really I regard it as a contradiction in terms.
The haecceitist might say that when two things are non-qualitativecounterparts, that is because they stand in a certain relation. Or they sharea certain property. Or they are both included as parts of a certain trans-
world mereological sum. But any two things stand in infinitely manyrelations, share infinitely many properties, and are both included as partsof infinitely many sums. For any class of ordered pairs, howevermiscellaneous, there is the relation of being paired by a member of thatclass; for any class of things, however miscellaneous, there is the propertyof belonging to that class and there is the mereological sum of that class.
Perhaps the haecceitist thinks that some of all these relations or propertiesor sums are somehow special, and he meant to speak only of the specialones. (Perhaps he also thinks that only the special ones exist.) Then hemust tell me which of all the relations and properties and sums I believein are the special ones. He cannot say that the special ones are the onesthat carve along the qualitative joints; that I can understand,2' but thatdoes not meet his need to single out some of all the ones that don't carvealong the joints. He must avoid circularity. I do not think he can answerme. If he cannot, he leaves it entirely mysterious what it could mean tosay that things were non-qualitative counterparts.
20The next several pages are mostly adapted from my 'Individuation by Acquaintanceand by Stipulation', pages 23-31, with the kind permission of the editors of ThePhilosophical Review.
21Though perhaps only by taking it as an inescapable primitive distinction; see section1.5, and my 'New Work for a Theory of Universals'.

230Counterparts or Double Lives?
(I have another, but far less serious, objection to the idea of a non-
qualitative counterpart relation. In section 1.6, I suggested that perhapsthere are no natural external relations whatever between parts of differentworlds; and that if so, we could bypass the idea of 'analogicallyspatiotemporal' relations and say simply that worlds are unified by externalinterrelatedness. A non-qualitative counterpart relation would presumablysink that hope.)
There is no way to make sense of a non-qualitative counterpart relation;
so if we are to be modal realists and reject overlap, then we had betteralso reject haecceitism. But can we afford to? We still have the seemingcases of haecceitistic difference. It would be very implausible anddamaging, I think, just to defy the intuitions. We must reject haecceitisticdifferences between worlds, and yet acknowledge genuine differencesbetween possibilities.
This we can do. Our problem rests on the presupposition that differencesbetween possibilities are differences between possible worlds. Abandonthat presupposition, and our problem solves itself. We satisfy thehaecceitist's intuitions on the cheap, giving him the distinctions betweenpossibilities that he rightly demands without buying into any mysteriousnon-qualitative aspects of worlds.
Possibilities are not always possible worlds. There are possible worlds,
sure enough, and there are possibilities, and possible worlds are someof the possibilities. But I say that any possible individual is a possibility,
and not all possible individuals are possible worlds. Only the biggest onesare.
The world is the totality of things. It is the actual individual that includesevery actual individual as a part. Likewise a possible world is a possibleindividual big enough to include every possible individual that iscompossible with it (where compossibility, the relation that unitesworldmates, is a matter of strictly or analogically spatiotemporalrelatedness, or perhaps of external relatedness generally). It is a waythat an entire world might possibly be. But lesser possible individuals,
inhabitants of worlds, proper parts of worlds, are possibilities too. Theyare ways that something less than an entire world might possibly be. Apossible person, for instance, is a way that a person might possibly be.
It is usual to think that the unit of possibility is the possible world.
I divide this thesis, retain part and reject part. It is true, and important,
that possibilities are invariably provided by whole possible worlds. Thereare no free-floating possibilia. Every possibility is part of a world - exactlyone world - and thus comes surrounded by worldmates, and fully equippedwith extrinsic properties in virtue of its relations to them. What is nottrue is that we should count distinct possibilities by counting the worldsthat provide them. A single world may provide many possibilities, sincemany possible individuals inhabit it.

Against Haecceitism231To illustrate, consider these two possibilities for me. I might have beenone of a pair of twins. I might have been the first-born one, or the second-
born one. These two possibilities involve no qualitative difference in theway the world is. Imagine them specified more fully: there is the possibilityof being the first-born twin in a world of such-and-such maximally specificqualitative character. And there is the possibility of being the second-
born twin in exactly such a world. The haecceitist says: two possibilities,
two worlds. They seem just alike, but they must differ somehow. Theydiffer in respect of `cross-identification'; that is, they differ in what theyrepresent, de re, concerning someone. Hence they must differ with respectto the determinants of representation de re; and these must be non-
qualitative, since there are no qualitative differences to be had. I say:
two possibilities, sure enough. And they do indeed differ in representationde re: according to one I am the first-born twin, according to the otherI am the second-born. But they are not two worlds. They are twopossibilities within a single world. The world in question contains twincounterparts of me, under a counterpart relation determined by intrinsicand extrinsic qualitative similarities (especially, match of origins). Eachtwin is a possible way for a person to be, and in fact is a possible wayfor me to be. I might have been one, or I might have been the other.
There are two distinct possibilities for me. But they involve only onepossibility for the world: it might have been the world inhabited by twosuch twins. The haecceitist was quite right when he thought that purelyqualitative worlds gave us too narrow a range of distinct possibilities.
He concluded that worlds must not be purely qualitative. He'd have donebetter to conclude that worlds gave us too narrow a range of possibilities.
The parts of worlds also must be put to use.
For a second illustration, consider the thought that I might have beensomeone else. Here am I, there goes poor Fred; there but for the graceof God go I; how lucky I am to be me, not him. Where there is luckthere must be contingency. I am contemplating the possibility of my beingpoor Fred, and rejoicing that it is unrealised. I am not contemplatinga possibility that involves any qualitative difference in the world - not,
for instance, a world where someone with origins just like mine suffersmisfortunes just like Fred's. Rather, I am contemplating the possibilityof being poor Fred in a world just like this one. The haecceitist will suggestthat I have in mind a qualitative duplicate of this world where the non-
qualitative determinants of representation de re somehow link me withthe qualitative counterpart of Fred. But this distorts my thought: I thoughtnot just that I might have lived Fred's life, but that I might have beenFred living Fred's life. Maybe I misunderstood my own thought - it's hardto be sure - but let's see if the haecceitist's amendment is really needed.
I think not. I suggest that the possibility I have in mind is not a worldthat is like ours qualitatively but differs from ours haecceitistically. Instead

232Counterparts or Double Lives?
it is a possible individual, in fact an actual individual, namely poor Fredhimself. Like any other possible person, he is a possible way for a personto be. And in a sense he is even a possible way for me to be. He is mycounterpart under an extraordinarily generous counterpart relation, onewhich demands nothing more of counterparts than that they be thingsof the same kind.22 Any property that one of my counterparts does haveis a property that I might have; being Fred - being literally identical withhim - is such a property; and so there is a sense in which I might havebeen him. That is not to say that the world might have been such thatI was Fred - it makes no sense to thank God for His gracious favouritismin making the world be as it is, rather than some different way such thatI would have been poor Fred! The possibility in question is a possibilityfor me, not for the world. It is not some other world, differinghaecceitistically from ours, which represents de re of me that I am Fred;
it is Fred himself, situated as he is within our world.23Likewise for the apparent haecceitistic differences that arise if we livein the seventeenth epoch of a world of eternal recurrence. The possibilitywhich represents me de re as living instead in the 137th epoch is not someother world that differs haecceitistically from ours; it is my this-worldlyduplicate in the 137th epoch. Insofar as he is my counterpart (that is,
on those resolutions of vagueness that make him my counterpart despitethe fact that we are worldmates) he is a possibility for me; that is all Ineed mean when I say that I might have been him.
Besides possible individuals, world-sized and smaller, there are still otherpossibilities: joint possibilities for sequences of more than one individual,
taken in a given order. These joint possibilities are themselves sequencesof appropriate length, with all their terms drawn from a single world.
A suitable pair of individuals in a given order, for instance, (take thisas a two-term sequence) is a way that a pair of individuals might possiblybe. Imagine that we live in a spatially symmetric world. The entire history22Jn 'Counterpart Theory and Quantified Modal Logic' I took it as axiomatic thatnothing can have any counterpart besides itself in its own world. I would now considerthat requirement appropriate under some but not all resolutions of the vagueness of thecounterpart relation.
23Thomas Nagel discusses the thought that he might have been someone else. He writes`my being TN (or whoever I in fact am) seems accidental . . . it seems as if I just happento be the publicly identifiable person TN' (`The Objective Self', page 225). He insists thatthis thought should be respected at face value, and not converted into the more tractablethought that I might have lived a different life. I in turn insist that it should not be converted,
as Nagel himself proposes, into the thought that really he is not TN after all, but ratherhe is a 'self' which happens to view the world through TN but might have viewed theworld through someone else. (How would that help? Couldn't you work up a sense ofcontingency and luck about being one 'self' rather than another?) The treatment I suggesthere is due, in essentials, to Hazen, 'Counterpart-theoretic Semantics for Modal Logic',
page 331.

Against Haecceitism 233of one side is replicated on the other side. But it didn't have to be so.
An alternative possibility for the world starts out symmetric, just as thisworld supposedly is; but tomorrow one side is destroyed by a catastropheand .the other side survives. I have my twin, J, on the other side. Onejoint possibility for me and my twin is that I am killed in the catastropheand he survives. Another, which I prefer, is that he is killed and I survive.
The haecceitist has his way of distinguishing the two possibilities. I havemy cheaper way. The world of the catastrophe has its pair of twins, Kwho gets killed and L who lives. Therefore it provides two pairs ofcompossible individuals: <K, L> and <L, K>. These are two different waysfor a pair of individuals to be, differing only in order. In particular, theyare two different ways for the pair <I, J> to be, two different jointpossibilities for me and my twin. Both K and L are qualitative counterpartsof both I and J; further, the relations between K and L are like the relationsbetween I and J;24 and so there is a natural sense in which both the pairs<K, L) and <L, K> are qualitative counterparts of the pair <I, J>. Of thesetwo joint possibilities for <I, J>, <L, K) is the one I prefer. Still other jointpossibilities are sequences with repetitions or gaps. There might have beena world with no duplication, but only one shared counterpart H of thetwins I and J. One joint possibility for the pair <I, J) is that they mighthave both existed and been identical; this is the pair <H, H>, a sequencewith a repetition. Another is that I alone might have existed: this is thepair <H, *>, a gappy sequence with the second term omitted. (I mark thegap by a star.) A third is that J alone might have existed: this is the pair<*, H>, a gappy sequence with the first term omitted.25 Once again, wehave our desired difference of possibilities without any difference ofworlds.26240n the need to consider these similarities of relations, see Hazen, 'Counterpart-
theoretic Semantics for Modal Logic', and my Philosophical Papers, volume I, pages 44-6.25An n-place sequence consists of terms indexed by the numbers 1 through n; a gappyn-place sequence consists of terms indexed by some but not all of these numbers. Whengaps are permitted, the same sequence can be written in different ways and will be a jointpossibility for sequences of different lengths.. Thus <X, Y), <X, Y, *), <X, Y, *, *X andso on are all the same thing; this thing may be an ungappy possibility for pairs and anincreasingly gappy possibility for triples, quadruples, and so on.
26The problem of the symmetric world and its asymmetric alternative is given inAdams, 'Primitive Thisness and Primitive Identity'. The treatment I suggest for it is againdue, in essentials, to Hazen, 'Counterpart-theoretic Semantics for Modal Logic' and isbased on. Hazen's treatment in The Foundations of Modal Logic. Hazen applies thetreatment on a grander scale; we can reach his proposal in four steps. (1) We could takejoint possibilities for infinite, indeed perhaps transfinite, sequences. (2) Instead of indexingby finite numbers or transfinite ordinals to make a sequence, we could use some othersystem of indexing; then a joint possibility for an indexed family of individuals is anotherfamily, indexed by the same indices (perhaps with gaps), of individuals from a single world.
(3) A natural system would be to index every member of the original family by itself;
then these same individuals will serve to index the other families that are joint possibilities

234Counterparts or Double Lives?
I noted an analogy in section 1.2. We often quantify restrictedly overworlds, limiting our attention to those that somehow resemble ours, andwe call this a restriction to 'accessible' worlds. And we often quantifyrestrictedly over possible individuals, limiting our attention to those thatsomehow resemble some given this-worldly individual, and I call this arestriction to 'counterparts' of that individual. To underline the analogy,
we might usefully borrow some terminology. In the broadest sense, allpossible individuals without exception are possibilities for me. But someof them are accessible possibilities for me, in various ways, others arenot. (Likewise for joint possibilities: in the broadest sense, all pairs ofpossible individuals are possibilities for any pair, but some are accessiblepossibilities in various ways that others are not.) My qualitativecounterparts are metaphysically accessible possibilities for me; or better,
each of many legitmate counterpart relations may be called a relationof metaphysical accessibility. My epistemic alternatives - those possibleindividuals who might, for all I know, be me - are epistemically accessiblepossibilities for me; my doxastic alternatives are doxastically accessible;
and so on, whenever content may be given by a class of alternative possibleindividuals (see section 1.4). Metaphysical and (for instance) epistemicpossibilities for me are not things of two different sorts. They are possibiliaout of the same plurality of worlds. The difference is in the accessibility.
Note that when we talk of what is the case according to individualpossibilities, we can in a sense assign content to the possibility regardlessof questions of accessibility. Whether this other-worldly winner is apossibility according to which Humphrey wins depends on whether heis an accessible possibility for Humphrey; but be that as it may, he isin any case an individual possibility of winning.
Mind you, new terminology does not make a new theory. I'm still doingbusiness at the same old stand - counterpart theory. Whether I call themindividual possibilities or possible individuals, they still remain just whatthey always were: parts of this and other worlds. Whether I speak ofcounterpart relations or accessibility relations (metaphysical accessibility,
as opposed to epistemic or doxastic or the like) I still mean some sort ofrelations of comparative similarity. It is Humphrey's winning counterpartswho make it so that he might have won. Likewise when I speak of jointpossibilities and their counterpart or accessibility relations - it'sstill similarity, though this time it's similarity of sequences so that similarityin relations between the terms of the sequence may play a role. The purposefor the original family (4) Finally, we might take our families to include all inhabitantsof a given world. Then the joint possibilities for these most inclusive indexed familiesare what Hazen calls `stipulational worlds'. These simulate worlds that differhaecceitistically; but I think it is best to insist that they are not worlds, and fall into placealongside their smaller siblings as part of the anti-haecceitist's way of explaining awaythe haecceitist's intuitions.

Against Haecceitism235of the alternative terminology is only to help you see how to make thesubstitution I favour: differences between worldmate individuals in placeof haecceitistic differences between worlds. That is my cheap substitutefor haecceitism.
Is 'cheap' an understatement? Is there any cost at all? I think thereis - simply the cost of making a break with established theory, on whichall differences between possibilities are supposed to be differences betweenpossible worlds. It is chaos if too many questions come open all at once,
therefore theoretical conservatism is a good idea. There should be apresumption in favour of the incumbent theory, and against gratuitioussubstitutes. But if I was right that the theories congenial to haecceitismare in serious trouble on other grounds, and if we still want at least asimulation of haecceitistic difference, then I think my substitute is byno means gratuitous, and cheap at the price.
So I think it best, in general, to say that representation de re is donenot by worlds, but by the appropriate individual (or joint) possibilitiesthat are available within the various worlds. Still it remains true, for themost part, that one world will provide at most one accessible possibilityfor a given individual (or sequence). The exceptions come only if we getmultiple counterparts within a world, either because we have anuncommonly repetitious world or because we use an uncommonly laxcounterpart relation. Therefore, for the sake of familiarity, I shall mostlyrevert to speaking of representation de re by worlds, or of what is thecase about an individual according to a world.
Continuing our survey of theories to see which ones are congenial tohaecceitism, we turn next to the versions of ersatz modal realismintroduced in chapter 3. Pictorial ersatzism presumably goes the sameway as the genuine modal realism that it so closely imitates: there couldbe a version with overlap and a version without. The first would becongenial to haecceitism but would mystify us by the way it transformedproperties into relations. The second would be uncongenial to haecceitism;
would explain representation de re in terms of qualitative counterpartrelations between 'abstract' ersatz individuals (or between those and actualconcrete things); and would provide quasi-haecceitistic differences betweenpossibilities for individuals, these being for the most part proper partsof ersatz worlds.
As for magical ersatzism, I have no idea how abstract simples couldmanage to do any representing at all, be it de re or be it qualitative, sostill less do I have any idea whether they must do the one thing by doingthe other. It's bad enough to be a magician, but I don't see why it's anyworse to be a haecceitist as well.
Linguistic ersatzism, which for all its primitive modality and falseconflations still seems the strongest rival to genuine modal realism, can

236Counterparts or Double Lives?
easily go either way. To provide for haecceitistic differences, we need onlymake our ersatz worlds in a language equipped with proper names. Thesemight be the ordinary proper names of everyday language; or they mightbe the subscripted letters that serve as individual constants in a typicalformal language; or they might be the Lagadonian proper names of actualthings, that is the things themselves; or whatever we please. Whateverthe names are, they enable an ersatz world to say of an individual, byname, that it has so-and-so property. If representation de re works bynaming, there is no reason for it to be governed by qualitative character.
Let us suppose that we do not endow the names with descriptive content -
or anyway not too much descriptive content - so that we preserveconsistency if we make new ersatz worlds from old by some sort ofsubstitution of names. That substitution will not change the qualitativecharacter which the ersatz world ascribes to the concrete world. But itwill normally make a difference to what is represented de re concerningthe named individuals. Suppose again that ours is a world of one-wayeternal recurrence; suppose that we have names - perhaps Lagadonian -
for ourselves, and different names for our 137th-epoch counterparts; startwith the actualised ersatz world, swap the names of the inhabitants ofthe seventeenth and the 137th epochs, and you get a new ersatz worldthat differs haecceitistically from the original. It falsely says of us by name,
and thereby represents of us de re, that we live in the 137th epoch. Onthis version of linguistic ersatzism, haecceitistic differences are no problem.
Again they are only to be expected, and the problem would be to avoidthem.
At least, that is so if all we want are haecceitistic differences aboutactual individuals. If representation de re works by naming, then wherenames give out, representation de re and haecceitistic differences give outas well. We at least have Lagadonian names for all actual individuals,
whether or not we have more ordinary names. But we have no Lagadoniannames for unactualised other-worldly individuals because, if ersatzismis true, there are no such things. We can and do introduce descriptiveterms that would denote things if, but only if, the world were suitablydifferent; but this method of naming relies on qualitative character (andqualitative relations to already named things) and so cannot increase ourstock of haecceitistic differences. It seems that linguistic ersatzism onceagain forces us to conflate possibilities because we cannot distinguish themin a this-worldly language. This time, instead of losing qualitativedifferences having to do with nameless alien properties, we lose de redifferences having to do with nameless unactualised individuals. This time.,
I think the lost differences needn't be missed. We could be content tolet them go, ending with a divided theory: haecceitism for possibilitieshaving to do with actual individuals, anti-haecceitism for remoterpossibilities having to do with unactualised individuals.27

Against Haecceitism 237If a linguistic ersatzer does not want haecceitistic differences, he isn'tstuck with them. He has two alternative remedies.28 (1) He mightconstruct his ersatz worlds in two steps, first incorporating the haecceitisticdifferences he regards as artificial and afterward 'factoring out' thosedifferences. He starts with sentences in a worldmaking language equippedwith names. In the first step he takes (infinite) maximal consistentconjunctions of sentences. Some of these conjunctions will be isomorphic,
differing only by a permutation of names. In the second step he takes(infinite) maximal disjunctions of mutually isomorphic conjunctions. Thisis like what Carnap does when he defines structure-descriptions —
qualitative ersatz miniworlds saying how many individuals of eachof several kinds there are — as disjunctions of isomorphic state-
descriptions.29 Or (2) he might leave out the proper names in the firstplace, limiting the resources of his worldmaking language to provide onlyfor qualitative description. This would be like defining structure-
descriptions as numerically quantified sentences: there are five round redthings, six square blue ones, no square red ones, . . . .
Either way, our ersatzer needs a new account of representation de re:
for his qualitative ersatz worlds either say nothing about individuals byname which distinguishes one from the rest, or else they decline to speakof individuals by name at all. But a new account is not far to seek: theersatzer is welcome to borrow counterpart theory.3° Recall that alongwith our linguistic ersatz worlds, we also get linguistic ersatz individuals.
These are maximal consistent descriptions of individuals, sets of opensentences or of predicates, which are actualised if they are true ofsomething and which may be actualised according to an ersatz world.
They are as complete as the resources of the worldmaking language permit.
If the worldmaking language is purely qualitative, or if we take27The system of Skyrms's `Tractarian Nominalism' requires this division, along withthe Ramsification of alien properties of which I complained in section 3.2. See alsoMcMichael, 'A Problem for Actualism about Possible Worlds'.
28How about a third remedy: keep the proper names, but endow them with so muchdescriptive content that a substitution of names would invariably destroy consistency?
For instance, he could deem it not just false but inconsistent to say of me, by name, thatI inhabit any but the seventeenth epoch. The trouble is that if this world containsindiscernibles, for instance if it exhibits two-way eternal recurrence rather than the one-
way recurrence just considered, then our naming cannot be entirely descriptive. No matterhow much descriptive loading we give the names, at least the names of indiscernibles canstill be swapped without destroying consistency, and that still gives us some haecceitisticdifferences.
29`On Inductive Logic', page 79; note that for the finite case, Carnap takes state-
descriptions as conjunctions rather than sets.
30McMichael is an anti-haecceitist ersatzer who has proposed exactly that, though itmay be that his ersatzism is not the purely linguistic version here considered but rathera linguistic-magical hybrid.

238Counterparts or Double Lives?
disjunctions to factor out the non-qualitative part of what is said, thenthese ersatz individuals will be maximally specific qualitative descriptions.
We have Humphrey; he is part of the 'concrete' world; he has a completeand correct qualitative description which we may call 'ersatz Humphrey'.
Ersatz Humphrey is a purely qualitative ersatz individual, actualisedaccording to the actualised ersatz world. There are no other concreteworlds, says ersatzism, and there are no other-worldly concrete Humphreysto be counterparts of ours. But there are other ersatz worlds; and thereare other linguistic ersatz Humphreys, actualised according to variouslinguistic ersatz worlds but not actually actualised. These unactualisedersatz Humphreys may be so-called because they are, so to speak,
counterparts of the actualised ersatz Humphrey, the one that correctlydescribes Humphrey himself.
The ersatz counterpart relation between ersatz individuals is a strangerthing than it might seem. We would think it was a matter of (intrinsicand extrinsic) qualitative similarity, on a par with relations of qualitativesimilarity between actual 'concrete' individuals. Not so: after all, ersatzindividuals are descriptions, chunks of language, and their similarity quachunks of language may have little to do with the similarity of individualsthey would correctly describe. I can say that two ersatz individuals arecounterparts, in a derivative sense, just when both of them describe genuineindividuals that are counterparts in my original sense (which is indeeda matter of qualitative similarity). But an ersatzer cannot agree, becausehe does not believe in genuine individuals described by unactualised ersatzindividuals. Might we say, modally, that two ersatz individuals arecounterparts iff, necessarily, if they were both actualised, then they woulddescribe genuine individuals which would be counterparts in the primarysense? No; because of the way ersatz individuals mirror their worlds, itwill normally be impossible for two counterpart ersatz individuals bothto be actualised, so the conditional will collapse into vacuity. Maybe theersatzer had better acknowledge his ersatz counterpart relation as partof his primitive apparatus - and a modal primitive to boot. Maybe hewon't mind, having already resigned himself to primitive modality.
The anti-haecceitist ersatzer faces the intuitively compelling cases ofhaecceitistic difference. For the most part he may borrow my way ofdealing with them, mutatis mutandis, as follows. Not all possibilities areersatz worlds; ersatz individuals also are possibilities for individuals. (Andpairs of them are joint possibilities for pairs of individuals, and so on.)
One ersatz individual is a possibility for another - and for the genuineindividual, if any, which the second describes - if the first is an ersatzcounterpart of the second. One ersatz world may afford many differentpossibilities for the same (genuine or ersatz) individual; and when thehaecceitist thinks we have haecceitistic differences between ersatz worlds,
what we really have are different individual possibilities provided by the

Against Haecceitism239same ersatz world. But there is one limitation. It reflects one of the lessershortcomings of linguistic ersatzism: there is no way to get indiscernibleersatz individuals. I might have been one of twins, either the first-bornone or the second-born one - no worries so far, two different ersatz twinsare actualised according to the same purely qualitative ersatz world, andeach one is an individual possibility for me. But also I might have beenone, or I might have been the other, of two qualitatively indiscernibletwins - and this time the anti-haecceitist ersatzer is forced to disagree,
because one ersatz individual must do duty for both of the twoindiscernible individual possibilities that I claim to distinguish. I thinkthat what he says is intuitively wrong, but also I think that what we wantto say about the case is uncertain and negotiable.
If haecceitistic differences are accepted at all, a question arises about theirextent. We can distinguish more and less extreme versions of haecceitism.
The most moderate version would say that qualitative character does mostof the job of determining representation de re, and haecceitistic differencesonly arise when there are ties to be broken. The most extreme versionsays that qualitative character does nothing at all to constrainrepresentation de re: anything could have any qualitative character, forinstance there is a (genuine or ersatz) world according to which you area poached egg. And of course there is a spectrum of intermediate positions.
As an anti-haecceitist, I might be expected to say that the fewerhaecceitistic differences the better - best is abstinence, second best ismoderation. Not so. A fairly extreme haecceitism is more defensible thanit may seem. Further, it has the obvious advantage over moderation: theless we believe in qualitative limits to haecceitistic difference, the less weneed an account of how those limits are imposed.31`If someone says I could have been a poached egg, I refute him thus:
I could not have been a poached egg! Extreme haecceitism flies in theface of common opinion about what's possible, and that's all there isto it.' - Not so. When you insist, no matter how forcefully, that you couldnot have been a poached egg, the extreme haecceitist can agree. Not quiteunequivocally, of course. After all, he does believe in worlds accordingto which you are a poached egg. So if he speaks absolutely withoutrestriction, ignoring none of all the possibilities he thinks there are, thenhe has to say you could have been a poached egg. But he doesn't have31It was Pavel TichY who persuaded me that extreme haecceitism was a theory worthyof serious attention, and in the discussion to follow I am much indebted to him. But Icannot remember our conversations in any detail; therefore I cannot tell how much ofthe position I shall present comes from TichY and how much is a figment of my ownimagination. I do not say that TichY holds, or ever did hold, any part of the positiondiscussed; I do not claim any part of it as my own work.

240Counterparts or Double Lives?
to speak without restriction. All hands agree that very often our modalitiesare quantifications restricted to 'accessible' worlds - we tacitly ignoreworlds where the past differs, where the actual laws of nature are violated,
where there are alien natural properties, or what have you. The extremehaecceitist need only say that this tacit restricting goes further than weusually think: even when all the other restrictions come off, still we persistin ignoring far-out worlds where things differ too much in qualitativecharacter from the way they actually are. Almost always, apart fromphilosophical discussions that can scarcely be put in evidence as samplesof 'linguistic intuition', at least these far-out worlds are left aside asinaccessible. Leaving them aside, indeed you could not have been apoached egg - which is just what you said.
Or is it? You probably thought you were speaking unrestrictedly. Youhad two opinions:
(1)that you meant something true when you said you could not havebeen a poached egg, and(2)that in saying so, you did not mean to be quantifying over less thanall the possibilities there are.
The extreme haecceitist has a way to agree with (1), but at the cost ofdisagreeing with (2). He is 'speaking with the vulgar' - that is, he is grantingthe truth of what you said, but disputing your understanding of whatyou meant.
Two opposite views are taken of such manoeuvres. Some say thatspeaking with the vulgar is a worthless trick: we know perfectly well whatwe mean, and if it isn't what the trickster means, then his merely verbalagreement with us is no agreement at all. It does nothing fair to enhancethe plausibility of his doctrines. On this view, to speak with the vulgarby agreeing with (1) while disputing (2) is just a dishonest way of coveringup genuine and serious disagreement. Others say there is theory and thereis evidence; evidence may not be tampered with, theory must be madeto fit evidence, but otherwise theory is up for grabs. If it fits the evidenceand is duly systematic, what more could you ask? The evidence is naivelinguistic intuition, such as (1), and evidence is sacrosanct. But (2) is justa piece of semantic theory - ill-considered unsystematic folk theory atthat - and must compete on equal terms with rival theories. On this secondview, success in speaking with the vulgar is a perfect defence.
I take a middle view. There is no sharp line between sacrosanct intuitionand freewheeling theory. As theorists, we start where we are - where else? -
with a stock of initial opinions, and we try to rework them into somethingbetter, guided partly by conservatism and partly by the pursuit oftheoretical unity. Any revision of previous opinions counts as some cost.

Against Haecceitism241But some of our opinions are firmer and less negotiable than others.
And some are more naive and less theoretical than others. And thereseems to be some tendency for the more theoretical ones to be morenegotiable. If the extreme haecceitist can agree with (1) at the cost ofdisputing (2), that is still a cost. He has not escaped scot-free. But thecost that way is much less than if he had been unable to agree with (1)
at all. His speaking with the vulgar does something for him, if noteverything. Perhaps it does enough. That depends on what he stands togain.
He stands to avoid a burdensome debt. A moderate haecceitist saysthat there are qualitative constraints on haecceitistic difference; there isno world at all, however inaccessible, where you are a poached egg. Whynot? He owes us some sort of answer, and it may be no easy thing tofind a good one. Once you start it's hard to stop - those theories thatallow haecceitistic differences at all do not provide any very good wayto limit them. The extreme haecceitist needn't explain the limits - becausehe says there aren't any.
Being a haecceitist involves a choice of evils. Perhaps the least bad wayis to make linguistic ersatz worlds in a language equipped with propernames - state-descriptions, or something of that sort. That way, thehaecceitist is stuck with primitive modality and with a conflation of someseemingly different possibilities - or so I've argued in section 3.2 - butmaybe he doubts this, or maybe he tolerates these drawbacks morewillingly than he could tolerate a blanket denial of all haecceitisticdifferences. Now consider a set of sentences, otherwise a suitable candidateto be an ersatz world, which says of you, by name, that you are a poachedegg. If this set is consistent, it is an ersatz world according to which youare a poached egg. The burden of moderation, therefore, is to say whatmakes this set inconsistent. It isn't inconsistent in a narrowly logical sense.
It isn't inconsistent in virtue of axioms concerning the incompatibilityof a few fundamental properties and relations of simple things, like theaxiom saying that no particle is both positively and negatively charged.
And it isn't inconsistent in virtue of axioms relating local to globaldescriptions, like the axiom saying that if particles are arranged in such-
and-such way there is a talking donkey. (The candidate ersatz world sayswhat it should about your particles: they are arranged in the way that'sright, according to the local-global axioms, for a poached egg.) Anylinguistic ersatzer needs axioms of these two kinds; and he needs primitivemodality - so I've argued - in order to say which sentences of the properform are to be his axioms. But the extreme haecceitist, and the anti-
haecceitist as well, can stop there. The moderate haecceitist needs furtheraxioms of quite a different kind: axioms in which proper names occuressentially, such as an axiom which says of you, by name, that you arenot a poached egg. And once more, the only way to tell which sentences

242Counterparts or Double Lives?
of the appropriate form are the axioms is to say that the axioms are theones that are necessarily true.
Is that so bad? If you're stuck with primitive modality, why not enjoyit? Anybody can say: my axioms are all the sentences, of whatever form,
that are necessarily true. Or, bypassing the axioms altogether: a set ofsentences is consistent iff it is possible for all its sentences to be true.
That will do as well for the moderate as for the extremist. But it doesn'tdo very well for anybody. What would be more informative - more ofa theory - would be to list, if not the axioms themselves, at least the kindsof necessary axioms that suffice for a minimum basis. If so, it seems thatthe moderate haecceitist requires three fundamentally different kinds, whilehis rivals at both extremes get by with two. Primitive modality is badnews, and more kinds are worse than fewer. Here the extreme haecceitistis better off than the moderate.
Now suppose that the would-be haecceitist prefers his worlds genuine,
rather than ersatz. If so, he'd better accept overlap. (The alternative ofa non-qualitative counterpart relation seems more of a mystery still.) Thenhe has to say - or so I've argued in section 4.2 - that things have noaccidental intrinsic properties. Something must have the same intrinsicnature at all worlds that it is part of - all worlds whatever, not ignoringinaccessible worlds. Most of what we usually take to be your intrinsicnature - your shape, size, mass, composition, and so on - is contingent(at least if we drop all accessibility restrictions) and therefore cannot beintrinsic after all. Rather, it consists of external relations which you bearto some but not others of the worlds that share you as a common part.
The only intrinsic nature you have left is the part that could not possiblyhave been otherwise. (`Not possibly' in the most unrestricted sense.) Andperhaps not even the whole of that. Suppose you have your exact sizeaccidentally but your approximate size essentially. Might your approximatesize, at least, be genuinely intrinsic? - No, because it is a disjunction ofexact sizes and those, being accidental, must be relations. Stripped ofyour shape and size and all, and considered apart from your unexpectedlyrich pattern of relationships, you haven't much character to call yourown. Small comfort that what's left is yours essentially. You are, if notquite a bare particular, at least pretty scantily clad.
I can't really imagine what it would be like to believe this story - ofcourse those who sing the praises of 'trans-world identity' never havethis in mind.- so I haven't much idea what else someone might be readyto swallow after having gone this far. I can only say that if some haecceitistwants to explain why you could not possibly have been a poached egg,
it seems quite a handicap to have begun by turning so many of thedifferences between you and a poached egg into mere external relationsrather than matters of intrinsic nature. External relations are so calledbecause they don't supervene on the intrinsic natures of their relata, so

Against Haecceitism243how can your intrinsic nature stop you from poached-egging some oneof the worlds you're part of? I would rather not be required to answerthat question. Whatever remnant is left of your intrinsic nature willautomatically be essential, but beyond that there seems to be no intelligibleway to impose any limit on qualitative variation. In this case too, a fairlyextreme haecceitism seems preferable to moderation.
Up to a point, extreme haecceitism runs in parallel with my own anti-
haecceitist theory of 'individual possibilities'. Both theories are preparedto distinguish possibilities without qualitative difference of worlds, thoughfor me these possibilities are not different worlds but different possibleindividuals within the same world. Both begin by acknowledging quitea wide range of possibilities, and afterward cut down the range byaccessibility restrictions. Thus I don't deny that poached eggs are genuinepossibilities - it's just that they're inaccessible for the likes of us, in otherwords they're not among our counterparts. Both theories base theiraccessibility restrictions on qualitative similarity; that makes forinconstancy and indeterminacy, so that in some very special contextpoached-egghood might count as an accessible possibility for you afterall. (See section 4.5.) But the parallels are superficial. The underlyingdifference of principle remains: my worlds differ qualitatively or not at all.
I have been supposing that haecceitism would be supported by producingintuitive examples of haecceitistic difference. But there is another lineof argument in support of haecceitism: Chisholm's Paradox, as it is calledby those of us who dislike its conclusion. In a nutshell, it runs as follows.
Surely the qualitative essences of things allow at least a little bit of leeway -
something which is a certain way could have been at least a little bitdifferent - and yet chains of little differences can add up to big differences,
so qualitative essences must allow not just a little leeway but a lot. Inthat case, they cannot stand in the way of haecceitistic differences.
Chisholm presents the problem as follows. Suppose for the sake ofthe argument that Adam and Noah can be said to exist and have variousproperties not only in this world, W', but in other worlds as well.
(Despite Chisholm's caution in supposing this, I take it to be trans-worldidentity in the uncontroversial sense - his 'exist in' is my 'exist accordingto', and it is left wide open what it would mean for Adam and Noahto exist in a world.) The essences of Adam and Noah allow at least alittle bit of leeway. So we have a world W2 where Adam and Noah arejust a little bit different - Adam revised just a little bit toward the wayNoah is in this world, Noah revised just a little bit toward the way Adamis in this world. But now from the standpoint of W2 it is still true thatthe essences allow at least a little bit of leeway. So we have a world W3where Adam is revised just a little bit more toward the way Noah is inthis world, and Noah just a little bit more toward the way Adam is in

244Counterparts or Double Lives?
this world. But now from the standpoint of W3 . . . 'Proceeding in thisway, we arrive finally at a possible world Wn which would seem to beexactly like our present world W', except for the fact that the Adam ofWn may be traced back to the Noah of W' and the Noah of Wn may betraced back to the Adam of WI.' (Chisholm, 'Identity through PossibleWorlds', page 3; Loux, page 82.) If so, that is a haecceitistic differencebetween the worlds W' and Wn. So we have a paradox for anti-
haecceitists.
In addition, we have been forced to conclude that Adam's and Noah'sessences tolerate more revision than we might have thought. And thereis worse to come: couldn't we trace a very long chain of very small revisionsleading from you to a poached egg? So we have a paradox for essentialists,
including moderate haecceitists, who think that the essences of things aresomewhat tolerant but not extremely tolerant.
Chisholm's paradox has recently been discussed especially as a problemfor essentialism of origins. (See, for instance, Chandler and Salmon.)
We have a lot of planks, enough to build two ships to the same plans.
(Let's confine our attention to worlds exactly alike up to the start of theship-building, so that we needn't fuss about the identities of the planks.)
Here at this world, W', we build the good ship Adam from half theplanks and the good ship Noah from the other half. We think it essentialto Adam and Noah, respectively, to originate from more or less the planksthey actually did originate from. More or less - but surely it would beextravagant to deny that just one pair of planks could have been swapped!
So we have a world W2 . . . . And in the end we have a world Wn whereAdam is built from the planks used in W' to build Noah, and vice versa.
That may offend against anti-haeccetism, if we arrange the details to makeW' and Wn come out qualitatively indiscernible. But whether or not itoffends against anti-haecceitism, and whether or not we care, certainlyit offends against essentialism of origins. Further, the offence begins longbefore we get all the way to Wn. It's bad enough to have Adam andNoah each built with a mixture of many right planks and many wrongplanks. If our limit of tolerance was three wrong planks, world W4 isalready paradoxical. 32I don't distinguish this paradox about origins from Chisholm's originalparadox. Nobody ever said that qualitative similarity had to be entirely, or32It is, of course, wrong to suppose a determinate and precise limit; Chisholm'sparadox is, among other things, a sorites. But it would be best if we can separate questionsabout the proper treatment of vagueness from questions about the metaphysics of modality.
I think we can. I regard vagueness as semantic indecision: where we speak vaguely, wehave not troubled to settle which of some range of precise meanings our words are meantto express. I believe the vagueness of de re modality can be understood in just this way(see section 4.5) and if so, it will do no harm to pretend we have settled on some or otherprecise limit of tolerance.

Against Haecceitism 245even mostly, intrinsic. Match of origins, exact or approximate, or in thiscase similarity in respect of the previous history of one's planks, will doas one extrinsic respect of qualitative similarity. If we want to place greatstress on similarity of origins - I would say, if we speak so as to evokethat sort of counterpart relation - we may.
The paradox is safest if we take many small steps, but simplest if wetake few. The simplest version involves only two qualitatively differentkinds of worlds, and four maximally specific qualitative roles forindividuals - men or ships - in those worlds. Our world, let us suppose,
is an Adam-Noah world; the Adam role and the Noah role are occupiedin it by the individuals we call Adam and Noah. The Noam role and theAdah role are two compossible roles, each halfway between the Noahrole and the Adam role, and as different from one another as the Adamrole and the Noah role are. A Noam-Adah world is one where those tworoles are occupied. Because the four roles are maximally specific, all worldswhere the Adam role and the Noah role are occupied are exactly alike;
likewise for all worlds where the Noam role and the Adah role areoccupied. Please grant me that essences tolerate enough revision so that,
necessarily, an occupant of the Adam role could have occupied the Noamrole, and an occupant of the Noam role could have occupied the Noahrole. No point denying it - if you do, I will just increase the number anddecrease the difference of intermediate roles until the denial becomesabsurd, thereby cluttering the example to no good purpose. ConsiderAdam. His essence tolerates enough revision to let him occupy the Noamrole. If he had, his essence would then have tolerated enough more revisionto let him occupy the Noah role. So Adam could have been such thathe could have occupied the Noah role. So Adam could have occupiedthe Noah role. Here is the fatal move, disastrous for anti-haecceitists andessentialists alike: it leads both to a haecceitistic difference between ourAdam-Noah world and another one, and to the conclusion that Adam'sessence must be twice as tolerant as we had initially assumed.33Counterpart theory defends against the fatal move by denying that thecounterpart relation is transitive. Adam could have occupied the Noamrole, because he has a counterpart who does. That counterpart could have33Given what we have already assumed, it would be reasonable to assume also thatNoah's essence tolerates enough revision to let him occupy the Noam role. If so, we seemto have a second haeccetistic difference. There is the Noam-Adah world where Adamoccupies the Noam role, and there is the Noam-Adah world where Noah occupies it. Thisresembles Salmon's Four Worlds Paradox; except that I get by with three worlds, sinceI use one world - ours - twice over to provide both Adam and Noah. I reply that the verysame Noam-Adah world, and indeed the very same individual possibility in it, representsde re, concerning Adam, and that he occupies the Noam role, and also represents de re,
concerning Noah, that he occupies it. That can happen, I say, if Adam and Noah sharea common counterpart.

246Counterparts or Double Lives?
occupied the Noah role, because he has a counterpart who does. Adamcould have been such that he could have occupied the Noah role becausehe has a counterpart of a counterpart who does. (This counterpart ofa counterpart is, in fact, none other than Noah himself.) But a counterpartof a counterpart is not necessarily a counterpart. The counterpart relationworks by similarity. Little differences add up to big differences. Noahis enough like someone who is enough like Adam to be his counterpartto be his counterpart, but that doesn't mean that Noah is enough likeAdam to be his counterpart.34There is supposed to be a different defence available. Instead of relyingon intransitivity of the counterpart relation to block the fatal move -
indeed, without assuming counterpart theory at all - we could instead relyon inaccessibility of worlds.35 It goes as follows. We have three worlds:
our world W1, an Adam-Noah world where Adam occupies the Adamrole; W2, a Noam-Adah world where Adam occupies the Noam role;
and W3, another Adam-Noah world where Adam occupies the Noahrole. So there are two worlds that differ haecceitistically. And there isa world according to which Adam occupies the Noah role. But accessibilityis intransitive: W3 is accessible from W2 which is accessible from W1,
however W3 is not accessible from Wt. So from the standpoint of WI,
W3 doesn't really count - no worries! It is not so, if we ignore worldsinaccessible from ours, that we have a case of haecceitistic difference.
It is not so, if we ignore worlds inaccessible from ours, that we have aworld where Adam is revised enough to occupy the Noah role.
Say I: this is no defence, this is capitulation. In these questions ofhaecceitism and essence, by what right do we ignore worlds that aredeemed inaccessible? Accessible or not, they're still worlds. We still believein them. Why don't they count?
Why are we anti-haecceitists or essentialists in the first place? Didlinguistic intuition declare ex cathedra: 'Adam could not have occupiedthe Noah role'? Is our situation that we know this must mean somethingtrue though we haven't much notion what? Is our task just to discoversome sort of semantic machinery that will make the deliverances ofintuition come true, never mind how? Then indeed the machinery ofaccessibility might serve as well as anything.
Our real situation is not like that at all. If naive intuition claims todecide such a recondite matter, we ought to tell it to hold its tongue. What34Again I waive the requirement that nothing can have any counterpart in its own worldexcept itself; I take that to be a feature of some reasonable counterpart relations but notof others. Noah can be disqualified as Adam's counterpart simply on grounds ofdissimilarity.
35The inaccessibility defence is due to Chandler; it has recently been championed bySalmon against Forbes, who favours a counterpart-theoretic defence.

Against Haecceitism247we want is theory. We need an explanation of how representation de reworks. One hypothesis says that it works by (genuine or ersatz) qualitativecounterpart relations. Other hypotheses say that it works in other ways:
by non-qualitative counterpart relations, or by trans-world identity (inthe sense of overlap), or by naming, or by magic. One way or another,
all these other hypotheses are in bad trouble. Only the qualitativehypothesis is left standing. But that hypothesis gives us no way for anyworld to represent de re, of Adam, that he occupies the Noah role. That'sthe right reason to believe that he could not have done so. But it's a reasonto believe more: that there are no worlds where Adam occupies the Noahrole - no worlds at all, accessible or not.
Either the non-qualitative hypotheses are all kaput, or else not. If theyare, we have no idea how even an inaccessible world could represent Adamas occupying the Noah role. If not, we have no reason to opposehaecceitism. One way, the inaccessibility defence doesn't work. The otherway, we have nothing that needs defending. The 'defence' gives awaythe point of anti-haecceitism in order to defend the words 'Adam couldnot have occupied the Noah role'. Who needs that?
Someone does need it: the extreme haecceitist. Not that he needs it asa defence against the argument of Chisholm's paradox - on the contrary,
he accepts the argument! Presumably he thinks the non-qualitativehypotheses are not all kaput. He's already given away the point of anti-
haecceitism. But he can use a defence of the words. More urgently, hecan use a defence of the words 'Adam could not have occupied a poached-
egg role' which squares with his doctrine that there are worlds where Adamdoes exactly that. Faced with our naive insistence that Adam could nothave been a poached egg, he'd better find a way to agree, even if at thecost of making the words mean something a bit different from what wemight have thought. As we've already seen, he may speak with the vulgarby positing accessibility restrictions: ignoring far-out worlds where thingsdiffer too much from the way they actually are, there are no worlds whereAdam has the qualitative character of a poached egg. Indeed theaccessibility of the not-too-far-out worlds is intransitive, and indeed theintransitivities are such as to block the argument of Chisholm's paradoxin just the way that Chandler proposes. But none of this helps the causeof anti-haecceitism or essentialism. What it helps is the extremehaecceitist's plan of speaking with the vulgar.
Chandler said from the start that the violations of essence were stillthere, even if consigned to ignored worlds. He writes 'under thishypothesis, "it is not possible that this bicycle should have come intoexistence made up of entirely different parts" cannot be interpreted tomean that there are no worlds of any sort in which the bicycle came intoexistence made up of entirely different parts. It can only be taken to meanthat worlds in which this occurs, .f there are any, are not possible relative

248Counterparts or Double Lives?
to the actual world'. (`Plantinga and the Contingently Possible', page108.) But we look in vain, in Chandler's paper and many other places,
for an account of what it means to deny that some world is 'relativelypossible'. I think it is like saying: there are things such that, ignoringthem, there are no such things. Ignoring all the worlds where such-and-
such obnoxious things happen, it is impossible that such things happen.
Yes. Small comfort.
I said earlier that, up to a point, the extreme haecceitist's theory parallelsmy own. In particular, his way and mine of dealing with Chisholm'sparadox - his intransitive accessibility of worlds, my intransitivecounterpart relation - are much alike. In fact, I too might say that I dealwith Chisholm's paradox by calling some possibilities inaccessible. AndI too say that accessibility is intransitive because it's a matter of similarity.
But when I say it, I'm talking about accessibility between individualpossibilities; and that's just another terminology for counterpart theory.
When Adam occupies the Adam role in our world, and could have beensuch that he could have occupied the Noah role, what's two steps awayis not an inaccessible world; it's an inaccessible individual possibility.
We need no haecceitistic differences of worlds. In fact the inaccessiblepossibility in question isn't other-worldly at all, it's just our very ownNoah. And he isn't inaccessible once and for all; there are ever so manycounterpart relations, some tighter and some looser, and we can trulysay that Noah is a possibility for Adam or that he isn't, so long as wedon't say both in quite the same breath. To this inconstancy I now turn.
4.5 Against ConstancyThe Great Western Railway ought to have absorbed two other railwaysearly on: the Bristol and Gloucester, and the Birmingham and Gloucester.
But it tried to drive too hard a bargain. In 1845 the line from Bristolto Gloucester to Birmingham fell into rival hands. Therefore, after thegrouping of railways in 1923, the post-grouping Great Western lackeda part that it might have had. What we know as the Great Western, withoutthe missing line, was the whole of the Great Western; not, as it so easilymight have been, a part of a still Greater Western.
This is an instance of a much-discussed paradox.36 Most versionsinvolve what I would take to be temporal parts, or temporal parts of spatialparts, that something might have had or might have lacked. Such versions36See Wiggins, 'On Being in the Same Place at the Same Time'; my 'Counterparts ofPersons and Their Bodies'; Gibbard, 'Contingent Identity', Geach, Reference andGenerality (third edition), pages 215-18; van Inwagen, 'The Doctrine of ArbitraryUndetached Parts'; and Robinson, The Metaphysics of Material Constitution.

Against Constancy 249are all very well for me, since I believe in arbitrary spatiotemporal parts;
but to bring home the problem to those who do not believe in temporalparts, I have preferred a purely spatial example. The missing line wasat no time a part of the post-grouping Great Western; whereas with betterluck in 1845, the line would have been part of it for the entire quarter-
century of its existence.37Here is the paradox. Let GWR - be the Great Western as it actuallywas without the missing line. Let GWR be the Great Western. LetGWR + be the sum of GWR - and the missing line. Here is GWR, inother words GWR - ; they are identical. But the plural is a nonsense ofgrammar: 'they' are one thing, and it is self-identical. What might havehappened to it? It is GWR; so it would have been greater, in fact it wouldhave been identical to GWR + . It is GWR - ; so it would have been onlya part of GWR, not the whole, and hence not identical to GWR, whichwould instead have been identical to GWR + . Most certainly it, that isGWR - , would not have been identical to GWR + . We contradictourselves about what would have become of this one thing which we canrefer to in two ways: as GWR or as GWR - .
It is incredible to say, under the circumstances, that GWR and GWR -
are, after all, two different things: that they are really not identical or thatthey are only 'relatively identical'. (`Relative identity' is not identity, asmay be seen from the fact that it sometimes holds between things whichdiffer in their other relative identities.) We have one thing. What we havetwo of, besides names for it, are ways of representing. There is some kindof equivocation built into representation de re, and the equivocation showsup when we get conflicting answers. We have a suitable (genuine or ersatz)
world according to which the Bristol-Gloucester-Birmingham line wasabsorbed, and we have the actual thing that is called GWR and also calledGWR - . That one world manages to represent that one thing as includingthe line, and also manages to represent that one thing as excluding theline. Evidently the way the representing works is not constant. One nameevokes one way of representing, and the other another. At least in this waythe difference of names matters, though they differ not at all in whatthey name.
37To dodge strife about temporal parts, it is important that the post-grouping GreatWestern should have been in some sense a new and different railway from the pre-groupingGreat Western. On this I take the word of 0. S. Nock; 'It is sometimes lightly remarkedthat the Great Western was hardly affected at all. This is very far from the case, andit was a new Great Western Railway that came into being from 1923 onwards. The oldcompany did not absorb the local lines in Wales. Although the old Great Western RailwayCompany was not wound up the leading Welsh lines came into the new organisation asconstituents, not absorbed companies or subsidiaries'. (History of the Great WesternRailway, volume III, pages 1-2.)

250Counterparts or Double Lives?
You might think that what is going on is simpler than I have madeout: the names are non-rigid, they amount to abbreviated definitedescriptions, they differ in what they would have named if history hadbeen different in the way supposed. (I mean that they differ in what theywould have named under their actual interpretation - it is irrelevant whatdifferent interpretation they might have been given in the different history.)
You might think we're not dealing with representation de re at all, stillless with a peculiarly equivocal form of it, but merely with a differencein what would have been named by names with different non-rigid senses.
This might be partly right. Perhaps my introduction of the names didgive them different non-rigid senses, so that the names would not havenamed the same thing if history had been different. Perhaps I also failedin my attempt to word the crucial sentences so as to favour de re readings.
That hypothesis solves our original problem. But that doesn't get us far.
For I can restate the problem so that the difference-between-non-rigid-
names solution will not apply.
I ask you: think of this thing we've been talking about under two names -
now, what would have happened to it if the line had been absorbed? Nowyou're stuck. I haven't used either name. You know well enough whatthing is in question, and you know well enough what sort of (genuine orersatz) world is in question, you know that I'm asking de re what happensto that thing according to such a world - and you have no unequivocallyright answer. Your trouble, I think, is that two ways of representing havebeen evoked just previously, and now I'm giving you no guidance to helpyou choose between them. The fact (if it is a fact) that the two ways wereevoked by two non-rigid names is irrelevant.
Here is another way to recover our problem, blocking the difference-
of-non-rigid-names solution. Let's introduce new names which definitelyare abbreviated descriptions:
GWR/Jupiter = df that which is GWR if the line was not absorbed,
otherwise the planet Jupiter;
GWR - /Jupiter = df that which is GWR - if the line was not absorbed,
otherwise the planet Jupiter.
These contrived names are non-rigid for sure; but in a way that blocksthe solution. Had the line been absorbed, they would not have differedin what they named; because then they would both have named (acounterpart of) Jupiter. And in actuality also they do not differ in whatthey name; because the line was not absorbed, so they both name thesame thing, namely the thing we have called sometimes GWR andsometimes GWR - . So consider this thing. What might have happenedto it? It is GWR/Jupiter, namely by being GWR; so if the line had beenabsorbed, it would have included the line, it would have been GWR + .

Against Constancy251It is GWR /Jupiter, namely by being GWR - ; so if the line had beenabsorbed, it would not have included the line, it would still have beenGWR - . In no case would it have been the planet Jupiter, right? - If youagree with that, you must agree that my wording with the stressed pro-
nouns succeeded in setting up a de re reading and making it irrelevant whatour non-rigid names would have named. (This may not be a firm matter;
if my life depended on it I could probably manage to hear the question inthe other way and give an honest answer 'It would have been Jupiter'.
Perhaps some people could hear it that way more easily than I. It is enoughthat the reading I have described is possible, it needn't be inevitable.) So wehave back our inconstancy in representation de re. And the differencebetween the contrived names which makes them evoke different ways ofrepresenting is not a difference in what they would have named if the linehad been absorbed, because there is no such difference. Instead, ourcontrived names borrowed the evocative powers of the original names`GWR' and `GWR-' that appeared so conspicuously within them andwithin their definitions. I admit I helped them along when I reminded youthat GWR/Jupiter was GWR, and that GWR - /Jupiter was GWR - . Butas those identities are true, I do not see how it can have been unfair to say so.
I think there is a great range of cases in which there is no determinateright answer to questions about representation de re, and therefore noright answer to questions about modality or counterfactuals de re.38Could Hubert Humphrey have been an angel? A human born to differentparents? A human born to different parents in ancient Egypt? A robot?
A clever donkey that talks? An ordinary donkey? A poached egg? Givensome contextual guidance, these questions should have sensible answers.
There are ways of representing whereby some worlds represent him asan angel, there are ways of representing whereby none do. Your problemis that the right way of representing is determined, or perhaps under-
determined, by context - and I supplied no context.
You could do worse than plunge for the first answer to come into yourhead, and defend that strenuously. If you did, your answer would be right.
For your answer itself would create a context, and the context would selecta way of representing, and the way of representing would be such as tomake your answer true. (If at all possible. Perhaps not if you gave anespecially silly answer, such as that Humphrey could have been a poachedegg, yet he could not have been a human born to different parents.) Thatis how it is in general with dependence on complex features of context.
There is a rule of accommodation: what you say makes itself true, if atall possible, by creating a context that selects the relevant features so asto make it true. Say that France is hexagonal, and you thereby set18However, attitudes de re are a very different story. There is still indeterminacy, butit arises in other ways. See the final section of my 'Attitudes De Dicto and De Se'.

252Counterparts or Double Lives?
the standards of precision low, and you speak the truth; say that Franceis not hexagonal (preferably on some other occasion) and you set thestandards high, and again you speak the truth.39 In parallel fashion, Isuggest that those philosophers who preach that origins are essential areabsolutely right - in the context of their own preaching. They makethemselves right: their preaching constitutes a context in which de remodality is governed by a way of representing (as I think, by a counterpartrelation) that requires match of origins. But if I ask how things wouldbe if Saul Kripke had come from no sperm and egg but had been broughtby a stork, that makes equally good sense. I create a context that makesmy question make sense, and to do so it has to be a context that makesorigins not be essential.
Attend to the variety of what we say about modality and counterfactualsde re, and I think you will find abundant evidence that we do not havesettled answers, fixed once and for all, about what is true concerninga certain individual according to a certain (genuine or ersatz) world. Theway of representing is not at all constant. Different answers are oftenright in different contexts, as witness the comfort with which we adhereto, or presuppose, opposed answers. 'It would have included the Bristol-
Gloucester-Birmingham line.' `It would have been only part of a stillGreater Western.' - Can you really take this as a dispute? It can very wellhappen that no answer is determinately right, for lack of the contextualguidance that normally does the determining.
Even within a single context, we can find opposed answers that areright together. That could happen in the case of the Great Western andthe missing line. But it happens more prominently in familiar puzzlesabout how a bit of stuff constitutes the thing that is made of it. To dodgestrife about temporal parts, it will be best to begin with a case wherethe stuff constitutes the thing for all the time that either the stuff or thething exists: the plastic is synthesised right in the mold, so it no soonerexists at all than it constitutes the dishpan; and the dishpan is destroyedjust when the plastic is incinerated. But suppose the factory had receivedits order for plastic dishpans a day later. The same bit of plastic wouldhave been made; for the raw materials were already divided into portionsjust right to fill one mold. But it would have been made in anothermold, and it would have constituted a wastebasket. The dishpan wouldhave been made the next day out of different plastic. It reeks of doublecounting to say that here we have a dishpan, and we also have a dishpan-
shaped bit of plastic that is just where the dishpan is, weighs just whatthe dishpan weighs (why don't the two together weigh twice as much?),
and so on. This multiplication of entities is absurd on its face; and itonly obfuscates the matter if we say that the plastic and the dishpan are39See my `Scorekeeping in a Language Game'.

Against Constancy253`relatively identical' while implying that they are absolutely not identical.
But if the plastic and the dishpan are identical, what would havehappened to 'them', or rather to it, if the plastic had been made in theform of a wastebasket, and the dishpan had been made the next day outof different plastic? It would have been a wastebasket; it would have beena dishpan made the next day - those answers, I submit, are both correct.
The (genuine or ersatz) world in question represents the one thing twiceover, in two different ways, once as a bit of plastic in the form of awastebasket, and once as another bit of plastic in the form of a dishpanmade the next day. Both ways of representing work together in onecontext to make good sense of the statement that the plastic does constitutethe dishpan but it might not have done; in fact, it is the dishpan(`is' of identity) but it might not have been. It and the dishpan - itand itself - might have coexisted without being identical! This soundsoutrageous. It sounds like doublethink - I concede the identity of theplastic and the dishpan, yet when it suits me I still distinguish them. Notso. I only distinguish what everyone must distinguish: two differentreferences, in different words, to the one thing. And I say that thesedifferent references tend to evoke two different ways of representing,
whereby one world can make conflicting representations de re concerningthat one thing. You can double up the ways of representing, here withinone context, for one world, concerning one plastic dishpan. Or else youcan double up entities, somehow distinguishing the dishpan from its plasticafter all. I submit that the first doubling is more credible than the second.
I think the more common case of temporary constitution is no different.
This time, make a statue of wax. The wax exists before and after thestatue does, but for a time - for all the time the statue exists - the waxconstitutes it. The statue and a temporal part of the wax are identical.
Under other circumstances it would have been a statue made of differentwax; and it would have been formed into a nondescript lump sitting nextto the statue. A certain world represents it twice over in different ways,
once as the statue and once as the lump. Likewise for the still moretemporary constitution of a wave by ever-changing water, or a flame byever-changing gas.
Notice the one thing I can't say: I can't pull out the subject and conjointhe predicates, saying in the first case 'it would have been both awastebasket and a dishpan made the next day' or in the second case 'itwould have been both a statue made of different wax and formed intoa nondescript lump'. For whatever the world represents de re, in the twodifferent ways, it does not represent that anything satisfies the conjoinedpredicates.
I do not see how the resources of quantified modal logic can draw thedistinction we need. Let A specify the circumstances in question; let Fand G be the two predicates not to be conjoined. We have two formulas:

254Counterparts or Double Lives?
necessarily, if A then F(X), and necessarily, if A then G(X);
necessarily, if A then both F(X) and G(X).
But they will be equivalent, under any standard treatment. So we cannotsay that the first is true and the second false if the A-worlds representX in one way as satisfying F and in another way as satisfying G. Butif the resources of quantified modal logic, unless improved in some non-
standard way, do not know how to draw the distinction we need, themore fools they. We know how to draw it.
The inconstancy of de re representation can easily be explained incounterpart theory. We have many and varied relations of comparativesimilarity. Some differ from others because they put different weightsor priorities on different respects of (intrinsic or extrinsic) qualitativesimilarity; and even if they are alike in the respects of comparison theystress, they can still differ because one is more stringent than another.
Any of these relations is a candidate to be expressed by the word`counterpart'. Likewise many different relations, some more stringentand some less, some stressing some respects of comparison and othersstressing others, have a claim to be called 'similarity'. The exact meaningof 'counterpart' or 'similar' is neither constant nor determinate. Thesewords equivocally express a range of different semantic values, and thelimits of the range are subject to pressures of context. Two things maybe counterparts in one context, but not in another; or it may beindeterminate whether two things are counterparts. Inconstancy inrepresentation de re is exactly what we should expect under the hypothesisthat it works by comparative overall similarity of complex things. Whatwould be hard to understand, had it been found, would be constancy.
(If counterpart theory is right, the language of de re modality is governedby relations of similarity. And of course the language in which we sayexplicitly that things are similar or different also is governed by relationsof similarity. Suppose we mix the two; then the mixed language will begoverned by similarity twice over. Then it is vulnerable twice over toindeterminacy, and subject twice over to contextual pressures that pushthe resolution of indeterminacy one way or another. Should we expectuniform resolution, so that the de re modality is governed by exactly thesame relations of similarity that govern explicit predications of similarityor difference? Or should we expect a messier situation, in which one sortof similarity gets played off against another? If we had uniform resolutionthen, as Feldman and others have observed, it would be contradictoryto say such things as that I might have been very different from the wayI actually am. (Worse yet: I might have been very different from the wayI actually am while at the same time someone else was very similar to

Against Constancy255the way I actually am.) That certainly does not sound contradictory.
It sounds true. And what makes it true, I suggest, is a counterpart ofmine who is very similar to me under one similarity relation that governsthe de re modality, but very dissimilar to me under another similarityrelation that governs the explicit predications. For instance, someonemight be my counterpart in virtue of close match of origins, but differvery much from me in later life. (I don't mean to suggest that eithersimilarity relation is fully determinate; or that one sort of similarity relationis assigned permanently to one job and another to the other.) Wehave the messy situation, with different similarity relations playingoff against each other in a single context. And that should be no surprise:
the same thing happens even when all talk of similarity is explicit andde re modality is out of the picture. I can say that Ted and Fred arevery much alike, yet very different. Uniform resolutions would make thata contradiction - so much the worse for them! The fundamental principleof contextual resolution of indeterminacy is that what makes a resolutionright is that it makes good sense of what has been said. It is no goodmaking what has been said come out flagrantly contradictory, so anyuniform resolution gets disqualified at once. As for the narrowingdown of non-uniform resolutions, most likely that must wait on whatgets said next.)
A world where the Bristol-Gloucester-Birmingham line was absorbedprovides two rivals to serve as counterparts of the this-worldlyGreat Western Railway. The larger candidate is better in one way: likethe this-worldly Great Western Railway, it is the whole of a railway.
The smaller candidate is better in other ways: it matches the geographicalextent of the this-worldly Great Western, and also its parts can beput into correspondence with the parts of the this-worldly Great Westernin such a way that corresponding parts are excellent counterparts ofone another. Stress the respects of comparison in which the first candidatehas the advantage, and we get a counterpart relation whereby the worldin question represents the Great Western as including the line. Stress therespects in which the second has the advantage, and we get a counterpartrelation whereby the world in question represents the Great Westernas being no more extensive than it actually is, and as being less thanthe whole of a railway. It is understandable that the first counterpartrelation should be evoked by the name `GWR' for the this-worldlyGreat Western, and that the second should be evoked by the alternativename `GWR - ' for the very same thing. Likewise it is understandablethat the contrived names `GWR/Jupiter' and `GWR - /Jupiter' alsoshould evoke the first and second counterpart relations respectively,
thanks to the appearance within them of the original names. If thecontrived names are less decisively evocative, that too is only to beexpected .4°

256Counterparts or Double Lives?
When discussing the case in a more neutral setting, I dodged the questionwhether the names `GWR' and `GWR - ' were rigid. In the setting ofcounterpart theory, I can return to that question. Rigidity in the strictsense means naming the same thing at all worlds, or at least all worldswhere that thing exists. That's all very well for numerals and the like, butwithout overlap of worlds we wouldn't expect an ordinary proper nameof a person or a thing - of a railway, say - to be strictly rigid. However,
an ordinary proper name might well be quasi-rigid: that is, it might nameat another world the counterpart there of what it names here.
(Complications. (1) What if there is no counterpart at the other world? -
Then let the name be denotationless there. (2) What if there are two? -
Then let the name be indeterminate in denotation between the two. (3)
What if, despite all that wording and context may do to help, it remainsindeterminate which inhabitant of the other world is the counterpart ofthe thing named here? - Then again let the name be indeterminate indenotation. (4) So far, I have been saying what it means for a name tobe quasi-rigid with respect to this world; but it can likewise be quasi-rigidwith respect to other worlds, and quasi-rigid simpliciter iff it is so withrespect to every world where it names anything.)
Given inconstancy of counterpart relations, we may have to say thata name is quasi-rigid under some counterpart relations but not underothers. For instance, a name may be quasi-rigid under the counterpartrelation it tends to evoke, but not under the counterpart relation thatanother name of the same thing tends to evoke. I think that is the casefor the names `GWR' and `GWR - ', given the way I introduced them.
(However the contrived names `GWR/Jupiter' and `GWR/Jupiter' arenot quasi-rigid under any reasonable counterpart relation.) When a nameis quasi-rigid under the counterpart relation it tends to evoke, then itdoesn't matter whether or not we take its occurrence in a modalisedpredication as de re. We might ask whether the this-worldly denotationof `GWR' is such that its other-worldly counterpart, under the relationevoked by `GWR', is the whole of a railway. Or we might ask whetherthe other-worldly denotation of `GWR', which is to be the counterpart40I claim that in this case and many others, different names of the same thing tend toevoke different counterpart relations, thereby reducing the semantic indeterminacy of modalidioms governed by counterpart relations. But I do not claim (1) that evocative nameseliminate all indeterminacy, or (2) that an evocative name favouring one sort of counterpartrelation always outweighs other contextual pressures favouring another, or (3) that everyname without exception - still less, every referring expression - tends to evoke somecounterpart relations rather than others, or (4) that the semantic indeterminacy of modalidioms governed by counterpart relations is so severe as to render those idioms meaninglessexcept when something - as it might be, an evocative name - is present to reduce theindeterminacy. Compare Gibbard's treatment of contingent identity, which resembles minebut does make these claims; thus it seems to me fundamentally right, but exaggerated.

Against Constancy257of the this-worldly denotation under the relation evoked by `GWR', isthe whole of a railway. It's the same question either way. There are threeways for the choice of a name to make a difference to the propositionexpressed by a sentence: (1) by a difference in this-worldly denotation,
(2) by a difference in other-worldly denotation, and (3) by a differencein what counterpart relations tends to be evoked. If a name is quasi-rigidunder the counterpart relation it tends to evoke, then (2) and (3) merge.
To isolate the effect of (3) - and thereby see the need for inconstancy ofcounterpart relations - we must blank out (2), as I did in introducing thecontrived names `GWR/Jupiter' and `GWR - /Jupiter'.
A parallel treatment applies to our case of a thing and the matter thatconstitutes it. Here at this world we have the plastic made in the formof a dishpan out of a certain portion of raw materials; and at anotherworld, the plastic made out of the counterpart of that portion of rawmaterials was made in the form of a wastebasket, and a dishpan was madethe next day out of different plastic. Let us suppose that counterparthoodfor the portion of raw materials is unproblematic: perhaps the rawmaterials already were divided into separate portions before there wasany divergence between the alternative world and ours. We have twocandidates to be the counterpart of the plastic which is the dishpan. Ifwe stress match of origins, the other-worldly wastebasket is the bettercandidate. So we have a counterpart relation - that is, a way ofrepresenting - whereby the world in question represents the plastic, thatis the dishpan, as being made in the form of a wastebasket instead. Butif we stress similarity of form, and perhaps also such matters as the orderit fills and the place to which it goes, the other-worldly dishpan is thebetter candidate. So we have another counterpart relation - another wayof representing - whereby the world in question represents the dishpan,
that is the plastic, as being made a day later out of different raw materials.
Here at this world (the only world it is part of) the dishpan just is theplastic; but different ways of referring to this single thing tend to evokedifferent counterpart relations.
Likewise for our case of temporary constitution: the statue is a temporalpart of the wax; but under one counterpart relation a certain worldrepresents it as a nondescript lump, whereas under another counterpartrelation that same world represents it as a statue made of different wax.
Calling it the wax evokes the first counterpart relation, calling it the statueevokes the second.41I distinguish two different ways that something might have multiplecounterparts in another world. The first way is that there are different"See Robinson for a general discussion of constitution in terms of inconstancy ofcounterparts; and my 'Counterparts of Persons and Their Bodies' for discussion of a specialcase, the permanent or temporary constitution of a person by his body.

258Counterparts or Double Lives?
counterpart relations, differing in the comparative weights or prioritiesthey give to different respects of comparison, which favour differentcandidates. This is the inconstancy of counterparts that we have beenconsidering. The second way is that there might be a single counterpartrelation, given by a single system of weights or priorities, which onoccasion is one-many: it delivers multiple counterparts because of ties -
say, the tie between a pair of twins. It is not that one system of weightsand priorities favours one twin, and another favours the other. (Indeedthat might be so, but take a case where it is not.) Rather, any reasonablesystem results in a tie. It was this second way of having multiplecounterparts that forced us to acknowledge different individual possibilitieswithin a single world, lest we bè tempted to demand haecceitisticdifferences between the worlds themselves. But we need to allow for bothways of having multiple counterparts. The first cannot take the place ofthe second, because sometimes the candidates will be tied under anyreasonable standards. The second cannot take the place of the first,
because it does not provide a way for influence of context to tilt thedecision one way or the other.
So far I have simplified the discussion of inconstancy by ignoring myprevious proposal that accessible individual possibilities, not worlds, arewhat represent de re. But now we should merge the two topics, toacknowledge that inconstancy and ties might occur together. Take firstthe case of the Great Western and the missing line. We have the this-
worldly individual, excluding the line, which we call GWR or GWR - .
A world where the line was absorbed gives us two individuals, that is,
two individual possibilities: the one that includes the line and the onethat doesn't. It is not at all equivocal what these two possibilities, ifaccessible, would represent de re concerning the this-worldly individual.
The first would represent it as including the line; whereas the second wouldrepresent it as excluding the line and being less than the whole of a railway.
What is in question is which one is accessible. This question is the sameas the question which individual is the counterpart. Translating what Isaid before: there are two accessibility relations for individual possibilities,
both based on comparative similarity. The name `GWR' (or`GWR/Jupiter') for the this-worldly individual tends to evoke theaccessibility relation that stresses similarity in respect of being the wholeof a railway. The name `GWR -' (or `GWR - /Jupiter'), though it namesthe same thing, tends to evoke the accessibility relation that stressessimilarity in geographical extent and correspondence of parts. If nothingis said that decisively evokes one rather than the other, we might fall intoindecision. Or perhaps by default we get an accessibility relation that makesboth individual possibilities accessible. In that case - as in the cases of twincounterparts that tempt us into haecceitism - one world gives us twodifferent individual possibilities for the same thing. But there is another

Against Constancy259way to get multiple individual possibilities: suppose that every epoch ofa world of eternal recurrence contains a Great Western that succeeds inabsorbing the line. This world provides two rival infinite classes ofcounterparts - that is, of individual possibilities - for the this-worldly GreatWestern. Stress one respect of similarity, and it provides infinitely manyaccessible individual possibilities of including the line; stress another, andit provides infinitely many accessible individual possibilities of excludingthe line and being less than the whole of a railway; do nothing to evokeone stress or the other, and either it becomes indeterminate which kindof individual possibilities that world affords or else it affords a mixtureof both kinds.
Along with individual possibilities, we had joint possibilities forsequences; for instance, pairs. These include identity pairs and non-identitypairs; and so we get, if not exactly a sense in which one thing might havebeen two (or vice versa), at least a sense in which an identity pair mighthave been a non-identity pair (or vice versa). I don't know whether itis wise to call this 'contingent identity'. Perhaps so; or perhaps that phraseshould be reserved either for the unproblematic phenomenon of contingentco-referentiality of descriptions, or else for the absurd notion that onething has an individual possibility of not being self-identical. At any rate,
call the phenomenon what you will, we have the this-worldly identity pairof GWR and GWR - , that is of one thing twice over; and we have theother-worldly non-identity pair of GWR and GWR - , two differentthings. The second pair, if it were an accessible joint possibility for thefirst pair, would provide the identity pair with a possibility of being non-
identical. But to give the requisite accessibility of pairs, we need to stressdifferent respects of similarity for the first terms of the pairs and forthe second; and besides, we have to play down the respect of similarityin which identity pairs are ipso facto alike and non-identity pairs are ipsofacto alike. That may seem an implausibly complicated way foraccessibility of pairs to work. Yet unless this sort of accessibility relationis available, what accounts for our inclination to say that one thing mighthave been two? I suppose the relation is available; and it is evoked whenit must be, that is when it is required if what has been said is to be true.
It is well for my preferred theory - genuine modal realism, without overlap,
and with qualitative counterpart relations - that it has no trouble makingrepresentation de re come out inconstant. But I cannot claim this as anadvantage of my approach over its leading rivals, because they too - withone partial exception - can provide for inconstancy with equal ease.
Suppose we preferred the haecceitistic sort of counterpart theory:
genuine modal realism, no overlap between worlds, representation de reby means of non-qualitative counterpart relations. As noted in the previoussection, a non-qualitative counterpart relation would be a very mysterious

260Counterparts or Double Lives?
thing to have to take as primitive. But I don't see that many of themwould be significantly more mysterious than one, and if we had manycounterpart relations of whatever sort, we would have the resources forinconstancy. (Or perhaps we could have mixed counterpart relations,
conjoining one fixed non-qualitative relation with various differentqualitative similarity relations. The non-qualitative part provides thedesired haecceitistic differences, the qualitative part provides theinconstancy.) The mysteries of this theory are severe, but provision forinconstancy does nothing to make them worse.
Suppose next that we preferred linguistic ersatzism in an anti-
haecceitistic version: we have maximal consistent descriptions in qualitativeterms - qualitative ersatz individuals - and an ersatz world represents dere by means of ersatz counterpart relationships among these ersatzindividuals. For instance, we have one ersatz individual that describesHumphrey as he actually is, we have a second that is a counterpart ofthe first but differs by including the description 'wins the presidency',
we have an ersatz world according to which that second ersatz individualis actualised; and thereby that ersatz world represents Humphrey de reas winning. (Or we might prefer to say that it is the counterpart ersatzindividual itself - an accessible individual possibility - that does therepresenting de re.) If so, it is as easy as ever to have many respects ofcomparison. For instance, we have one ersatz individual that describesthe Great Western as it actually is, without the Bristol-Gloucester-
Birmingham line; and we have two others, both actualised according toa certain ersatz world, which are rival candidates to be counterparts ofthe first. One of them purports to describe a Greater Western that includesthe line; whereas the other purports to describe something that is lessthan the whole of a railway and that excludes the line. Which candidateis favoured depends on how much weight we give to different respectsof comparison; and that is how one ersatz world represents the GreatWestern in two conflicting ways (alternatively, that is how one ersatz worldaffords two conflicting individual possibilities for it).
Suppose next that we preferred linguistic ersatzism in its haecceitisticversion, in which representation de re works by naming. A linguistic ersatzworld represents de re, concerning the Great Western, that it does ordoesn't include the line, by containing or implying a sentence which saysof the Great Western, by name, that it does or doesn't include the line.
But then we can have inconstancy if our worldmaking language includestwo different names for the Great Western: `GWR' and `GWR - ', forinstance. An ersatz world can represent the Great Western under one nameas more inclusive, under the other name as being less than the whole ofa railway. In order to make sure that when the names go their separateways, the difference between them will be in the right direction, the namesmust have some descriptive content; axioms that distinguish the names

Against Constancy261will have to figure in the definitions of consistency and thence of ersatzworldsAs we might expect, the one theory that has some trouble providingfor inconstancy is genuine modal realism with overlap, in whichrepresentation de re works by trans-world identity. It was easy to see howwe could have many rival candidates to be the counterpart relation,
differing both in stringency and in the stress given to various respectsof comparison. Not so for identity. There is only one candidate to bethe relation of (numerical) identity: it can only be the relation thateverything bears to itself and nothing bears to anything else. There isno room for different contexts to go different ways about which relationis to be called identity; and there is no room for indeterminacy causedby indecision between rival candidates.
(The truth value of an identity sentence may indeed depend on context,
or remain indeterminate. But when that happens, the fault lies not withidentity but elsewhere. If the singular terms that flank the identity signhave inconstant or indeterminate denotation, that is apt to make the truthvalue of the sentence inconstant or indeterminate. But that is not a caseof inconstant or indeterminate identity between two different thingsdenoted by those terms; nor yet is it a case of inconstant or indeterminateself-identity. The relevant things are one and all thoroughly self-identical,
and none of them is at all identical to anything except itself. What's leftmurky is the question which exactly are the relevant things.)
Then to the extent that representation de re works by trans-worldidentity, understood as overlap, there is no room for it to be inconstantor indeterminate whether a given world represents a given thing as existing;
or, if it does, which part of that world it is whose properties are thosethat the given thing has according to that world. And that makes it difficultfor matters of de re modality to be inconstant or indeterminate. Supposewe ask whether Humphrey might have been exactly spherical in shape.
Suppose we stipulate that we have in mind the broadest sort of possibility,
without any accessibility restrictions. Suppose, per impossibile, thatspherical shape is not the intrinsic property it seems to be, but rather isa relation that things sometimes bear to worlds of which they are parts -
so really we are asking whether Humphrey spheres any of the worlds helives in. And yet suppose that 'exactly spherical' remains as precise andunequivocal as we are accustomed to think. Now all openings forinconstancy and indeterminacy are gone. Our question has to have a rightanswer, constant and determinate.
But that is only so long as the question concerns absolutely unrestrictedpossibility. I've argued that modal realism with overlap is congenial toextreme haecceitism, and uncongenial to essentialist constraints. If so,
then we could be content to agree that, speaking absolutely unrestrictedly,
Humphrey could indeed have been exactly spherical in shape. That is quite

262Counterparts or Double Lives?
definitely so - no inconstancy, no indeterminacy. And he could have beenstranger things than that! But on an extreme haecceitist overlap theory,
absolutely unrestricted modality loses much of its interest. To capture morecommonplace modal opinions, we bring on the accessibility restrictions -
and these are matters of the qualitative character of things, therefore theyare ideally suited to go inconstant and indeterminate. It may be absolutelysettled that a world represents Humphrey as spherical - but it may becompletely unsettled whether that world is a not-too-far-out world wherethings are not too different from the way they actually are, and thereforecompletely unsettled whether that world is one that we should ignore asinaccessible when we say what might have happened to Humphrey.
Counterpart theory treats the question whether Humphrey might havebeen spherical as follows. Some other-worldly spheres are rather distantcounterparts of Humphrey, none are very close counterparts of him, andhow close the closest of them are depends on which respects of comparisonyou stress. So the question whether Humphrey might have been spherical,
that is whether any sphere is his counterpart, takes the form: how close isclose enough? An extreme haecceitist overlap theory treats the samequestion as follows. Some other worlds where Humphrey is a sphere arerather distantly accessible from our world, none are very closely accessible,
and how close the closest of them are depends on which respect ofcomparison you stress. So the question whether Humphrey might havebeen spherical, that is whether any world where he is spherical is accessiblefrom ours, takes the form: how close is close enough? In the unclear casesas in the clear ones, this theory runs parallel to counterpart theory.
Restricted modality de re can be as inconstant and indeterminate as weplease.
Our initial example of inconstancy turns not on stringency but ondifferent respects of comparison. Here again, mutatis mutandis, anextreme haecceitist overlap theory runs parallel to counterpart theory.
We have the individual GWR, in other words GWR - ; under the overlaptheory, it is absolutely settled which worlds do and do not represent thatindividual as including the missing line; but it is not settled whether thatindividual might have included the missing line until it is settled whichare the worlds we ought not to ignore. And that is a matter of how weweigh similarity in respect of being a whole railway versus similarity inrespect of geographical extent and correspondence of parts. There contextmatters, and different names might evoke different accessibility relations.
And that is how GWR and GWR - are identical, yet we want to say,
speaking de re (since the Jupiter trick would block the alternative solution),
that GWR would have included the line and GWR - would have beenless than the whole of a railway.
So far, so good. But there is one thing that I think we want to saythat cannot be provided in the overlap theory, and that is one more reason

Against Constancy263why some other view should be preferred. Take the case of the plasticthat constitutes the dishpan for the whole of the time that either one exists.
(The case of GWR and GWR — would do as well.) I say that the plasticand the dishpan are identical. I also say they might not have been, namelyif the plastic had been made in the shape of a wastebasket and the dishpanhad been made the next day from different plastic. What I mean is notthe uncontroversial truth that 'the plastic' and 'the dishpan' (used exactlyas I use them, say by an other-worldly duplicate of me) might not havereferred to the same thing. And what I mean is not the absurd falsehoodthat something, namely the plastic which is the dishpan, has a de repossibility of failing to be self-identical. What I mean is that an identitypair has the de re possibility of being a non-identity pair. Is there a wayto make sense of this? Counterpart theory obliges, once we provide forpairs to be counterparts of pairs. But the overlap theory will not oblige,
and that is a point against it.
To oblige, the overlap theory would have to say that the very samepair is an identity pair at one world and a non-identity pair at anotherworld. This is not a difference in how the pair is represented, as an ersatzerwould say. It is not a difference between counterpart pairs, as I wouldsay. Only one alternative remains: it must be a difference in the relationsthat the one pair bears to different worlds. But how could that be true?
Being an identity pair is an intrinsic matter. That is just the way the pairis in itself, not an external relation of the pair to this world. It is hardenough to understand the idea that intrinsically shapeless things aredifferently shape-related to different worlds (or times) but it is harderstill to understand how something could bear a being-an-identity-pairrelation to some worlds and not to others. This just cannot be so. If thepair is wholly present in many worlds, then if it's an identity pair anywherethen it's an identity pair everywhere. At no world is it anything else. Thenit is determinately and unrestrictedly necessary that it be an identity pair.
That is inescapable: nothing we might do with inconstant accessibilityrestrictions can undo it.
`Contingent identity' is a tricky business. It isn't clear what should bemeant by the phrase: some things it might mean are uncontroversial, someare absurd. But one thing to mean by it which seems neither trivial norabsuid is that an identity pair has the de re possibility of being a non-
identity pair. Some theories, for instance counterpart theory, can makegood enough sense of that. But the overlap theory, to its discredit, cannot.

Works CitedAdams, Robert M. 'Theories of Actuality', Nais, 8 (1974), pp. 211-31; reprintedin Loux, The Possible and the Actual.
—'Primitive Thisness and Primitive Identity', Journal of Philosophy, 76 (1979),
pp. 5-26.
—'Actualism and Thisness', Synthese, 49 (1981), pp. 3-42.
Anderson, John. 'The Knower and the Known', Proceedings of the AristotelianSociety, 27 (1927), pp. 61-84.
Anscombe, G. E. M. Intention. Blackwell, 1957.
Armstrong, D. M. Universals and Scientific Realism (two volumes). CambridgeUniversity Press, 1978.
—'Identity Through Time', in Time and Cause: Essays Presented to RichardTaylor, ed. by Peter van Inwagen, Reidel, 1980.
Bealer, George. Quality and Concept. Clarendon, 1982.
Benacerraf, Paul. 'Mathematical Truth', Journal of Philosophy, 70 (1973),
pp. 661-79.
Bennett, Jonathan. 'Killing and Letting Die' (first of three lectures on 'Moralityand Consequences'), in The Tanner Lectures on Human Values, volume II,
ed. by Sterling W. McMurrin, Cambridge University Press, 1981.
Bigelow, John. 'Possible Worlds Foundations for Probability', Journal ofPhilosophical Logic, 5 (1976), pp. 299-320.
—'Believing in Semantics', Linguistics and Philosophy, 2 (1978), pp. 101-44.
Black, Max. 'The Elusiveness of Sets', Review of Metaphysics, 24 (1971),
pp. 614-36.
Boolos, George. 'To Be is to Be a Value of a Variable (or to Be Some Valuesof Some Variables)', Journal of Philosophy, 81 (1984), pp. 430-49.
Bricker, Phillip. Worlds and Propositions: The Structure of Logical Space. Ph.D.
dissertation, Princeton University, 1983.
Burge, Tyler. 'Individualism and the Mental', Midwest Studies in Philosophy,
4 (1979), pp. 73-121.
Campbell, Keith K. 'The Metaphysic of Abstract Particulars', Midwest Studiesin Philosophy, 6 (1981), pp. 477-88.264

Works Cited265—`Abstract Particulars and the Philosophy of Mind', Australasian Journal ofPhilosophy, 61 (1983), pp. 129-41.
Carnap, Rudolf. 'On Inductive Logic', Philosophy of Science, 12 (1945),
pp. 72-97.
—Meaning and Necessity. University of Chicago Press, 1947.
—'A Basic System of Inductive Logic', Part I, in Studies in Inductive Logicand Probability, volume I, ed. by Rudolf Carnap and Richard C. Jeffrey,
University of California Press, 1971; part II, in Studies in Inductive Logicand Probability, volume II, ed. by Richard C. Jeffrey, University ofCalifornia Press, 1980.
Chandler, Hugh. 'Plantinga and the Contingently Possible', Analysis, 36 (1976),
pp. 106-9.
Chisholm, Roderick. `Identity through Possible Worlds: Some Questions', Noas,
1 (1967), pp. 1-8; reprinted in Loux, The Possible and the Actual.
—The First Person: An Essay on Reference and Intentionality. Harvester Press,
1981.
Cresswell, M. J. `The World is Everything that is the Case', Australasian Journalof Philosophy, 50 (1972), pp. 1-13; reprinted in Loux, The Possible andthe Actual.
—Logics and Languages. Methuen, 1973.
—'Hyperintensional Logic', Studia Logica, 34 (1975), pp. 25-38.
—and von Stechow, Arnim. 'De Re Belief Generalized', Linguistics andPhilosophy, 5 (1982), pp. 505-36.
Davies, Martin. Meaning, Quantification, Necessity: Themes in PhilosophicalLogic. Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1981.
Dummett, Michael. Frege: Philosophy of Language. Duckworth, 1973.
Ellis, Brian. Rational Belief Systems. Blackwell, 1979.
Escher, M. C. The Graphic Work of M. C. Escher. Duell, Sloan and Pearce, 1961.
Etchemendy, John. Tarski, Model Theory, and Logical Truth. Ph.D. dissertation,
Stanford University, 1982.
Feldman, Fred. 'Counterparts', Journal of Philosophy, 68 (1971), pp. 406-9.
Field, Hartry. Science Without Numbers. Princeton University Press', 1980.
Forbes, Graeme. `Canonical Counterpart Theory', Analysis, 42 (1982), pp. 33-7.
—'Two Solutions to Chisholm's Paradox', Philosophical Studies, 46 (1984),
171-87.
Forrest, Peter. 'Occam's Razor and Possible Worlds', Monist, 65 (1982),
pp. 456-64.
—'Ways Worlds Could Be', Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 64 (1986).
—and Armstrong, D. M. `An Argument Against David Lewis' Theory ofPossible Worlds', Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 62 (1984), pp. 164-8.
Gale, George. 'The Anthropic Principle', Scientific American, 245 (1981), No.
6, pp. 154-71.
Geach, Peter. Reference and Generality, third edition. Cornell University Press,
1980.
Gibbard, Allan. 'Contingent Identity', Journal of Philosophical Logic, 4 (1975),
pp. 187-222.
Glymour, Clark. `On Some Patterns of Reduction', Philosophy of Science, 37(1970), pp. 340-53.
Goodman, Nelson. The Structure of Appearance. Harvard University Press, 1951.

266Works CitedGrandy, Richard. 'Reference, Meaning and Belief', Journal of Philosophy, 70(1973), pp. 439-52.
Haack, Susan. 'Lewis' Ontological Slum', Review of Metaphysics, 33 (1977),
pp. 415-29.
Hazen, Allen. 'Expressive Completeness in Modal Languages', Journal ofPhilosophical Logic, 5 (1976), pp. 25-46.
—The Foundations of Modal Logic. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Pittsburgh,
1977.
— 'Counterpart-Theoretic Semantics for Modal Logic', Journal of Philosophy,
76 (1979), pp. 319-38.
—'One of the Truths about Actuality', Analysis, 39 (1977), pp. 1-3.
Hilbert, David. Uber das Unendliche', Mathematische Annalen, 95 (1926),
pp. 161-90: translated in Philosophy of Mathematics: Selected Readings,
second edition, ed. by Paul Benacerraf and Hilary Putnam, CambridgeUniversity Press, 1983.
Hilpinen, Risto. 'Approximate Truth and Truthlikeness', in Formal Methodsin the Philosophy of the Empirical Sciences, ed. by M. Przelecki, Reidel,
1976.
Hintikka, Jaakko. 'Quantifiers in Deontic Logic', Societas Scientiarum Fennica,
Commenationes Humanarum Litterarum, 23 (1957), No. 4.
—Knowledge and Belief. Cornell University Press, 1962.
—Models for Modalities: Selected Essays. Reidel, 1969.
—The Intentions of Intentionality and Other New Models for Modalities. Reidel,
1975.
Hunter, Graeme, and Seager, William, 'The Discreet Charm of CounterpartTheory', Analysis, 41 (1983), pp. 73-6.
Jackson, Frank, 'A Causal Theory of Counterfactuals', Australasian Journalof Philosophy, 55 (1977), pp. 3-21.
Jeffrey, Richard C. The Logic of Decision. McGraw-Hill, 1965; second edition,
University of Chicago Press, 1983.
Johnston, Mark. Particulars and Persistence. Ph.D. dissertation, PrincetonUniversity, 1983.
Kanger, Stig. Provability in Logic. Almqvist and Wiksell, 1957.
Kaplan, David. 'How to Russell a Frege-Church', Journal of Philosophy, 72(1975), pp. 716-29; reprinted in Loux, The Possible and the Actual.
—`Transworld Heir Lines', in Loux, The Possible and the Actual.
Kim, Jaegwon. `Psychophysical Supervenience', Philosophical Studies, 41 (1982),
pp. 51-70.
Kratzer, Angelika. 'What "Must" and "Can" Must and Can Mean', Linguisticsand Philosophy, 1 (1977), pp. 337-55.
Kripke, Saul. 'A Completeness Theorem in Modal Logic', Journal of SymbolicLogic, 24 (1959), pp. 1-14.
—`Semantical Considerations on Modal Logic', Acta Philosophica Fennica, 16(1963), pp. 83-94; reprinted in Reference and Modality, ed. by LeonardLinsky, Oxford University Press, 1971.
—'A Puzzle about Belief', in Meaning and Use, ed. by Avishai Margalit, Reidel,
1979.

Works Cited267—Naming and Necessity, Harvard University Press (1980); previously printed(except for the preface) in Semantics for Natural Language, ed. by DonaldDavidson and Gilbert Harman, Reidel, 1972.
Leonard, Henry S., and Goodman, Nelson. 'The Calculus of Individuals andIts Uses', Journal of Symbolic Logic, 5 (1940), pp. 45-55.
Leslie, John. 'Observership in Cosmology: the Anthropic Principle', Mind, 92(1983), pp. 573-9.
Lewis, C. I. 'The Modes of Meaning', Philosophy and PhenomenologicalResearch, 4 (1944), pp. 236-49.
Lewis, C. S. Studies in Words. Cambridge University Press, 1960.
Lewis, David. 'An Argument for the Identity Theory', Journal of Philosophy,
63 (1966), pp. 17-25; reprinted in Lewis, Philosophical Papers, volume I.
—'Counterpart Theory and Quantified Modal Logic', Journal of Philosophy,
65 (1968), pp. 113-26; reprinted in Loux, The Possible and the Actual and,
with added postscripts, in Lewis, Philosophical Papers, volume I.
—'Anselm and Actuality', Noas 4 (1970), pp. 175-88; reprinted, with addedpostscripts, in Lewis, Philosophical Papers, volume 1.
—'General Semantics', Synthese, 22 (1970), pp. 18-67; reprinted, with addedpostscripts, in Lewis, Philosophical Papers, volume I.
—'Counterparts of Persons and Their Bodies', Journal of Philosophy, 68 (1971),
pp. 203-11; reprinted in Lewis, Philosophical Papers, volume I.
—Counterfactuals. Blackwell, 1973.
—'Survival and Identity', in The Identities of Persons, ed. by Amelie 0. Rorty,
University of California Press, 1976; reprinted, with added postscripts, inLewis, Philosophical Papers, volume I.
—`Scorekeeping in a Language Game', Journal of Philosophical Logic, 8 (1979),
pp. 339-59; reprinted in Lewis, Philosophical Papers, volume I.
—'Attitudes De Dicto and De Se', Philosophical Review, 88 (1979), pp. 513-43;
reprinted, with added postscripts, in Lewis, Philosophical Papers, volume I.
—'Index, Context, and Content', in Philosophy and Grammar, ed. by StigKanger and Sven Oilman, Reidel, 1981.
—'Ordering Semantics and Premise Semantics for Counterfactuals', Journalof Philosophical Logic, 10 (1981), pp. 217-34.
—'Logic for Equivocators', Nolis, 16 (1982), pp. 431-41.
—Philosophical Papers, (two volumes). Oxford University Press, 1983 and 1986.
—'New Work for a Theory of Universals', Australasian Journal of Philosophy,
61 (1983), pp. 343-77.
—'Extrinsic Properties', Philosophical Studies, 44 (1983), pp. 197-200.
—'Individuation by Acquaintance and by Stipulation', Philosophical Review,
92 (1983), pp. 3-32.
—Putnam's Paradox', Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 62 (1984),
pp. 221-36.
—'Against Structural Universals', Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 64 (1986).
—'Causal Explanation', in Lewis, Philosophical Papers, volume II.
—'Events', in Lewis, Philosophical Papers, volume II.
Loux, Michael. The Possible and the Actual: Readings in the Metaphysics ofModality. Cornell University Press, 1979.

268Works CitedLycan, William. 'The Trouble with Possible Worlds', in Loux, The Possible andthe Actual.
McGinn, Colin. 'Modal Reality', in Reduction, Time and Reality, ed. by RichardHealy, Cambridge University Press, 1981.
McMichael, Alan. 'A Problem for Actualism about Possible Worlds',
Philosophical Review, 92 (1983), pp. 49-66.
—'A New Actualist Modal Semantics', Journal of Philosophical Logic, 12 (1983),
pp. 73-99.
Meinong, Alexius. Ober Gegenstandstheorie', translated in Realism and theBackground of Phenomenology, ed. by Roderick M. Chisholm, Free Press,
1960.
Miller, David. 'Popper's Qualitative Theory of Verisimilitude', British Journalfor the Philosophy of Science, 25 (1974), pp. 166-77.
Mondadori, Fabrizio. `Counterpartese, Counterpartese*, CounterparteseD'Histoire, Epistemologie, Langage, 5 (1983), pp. 69-94.
Montague, Richard. 'Logical Necessity, Physical Necessity, Ethics, andQuantifiers', Inquiry, 3 (1960), pp. 259-69; reprinted in Montague, FormalPhilosophy.
—Formal Philosophy: Selected Papers of Richard Montague. Yale UniversityPress, 1974.
Nagel, Thomas. 'The Objective Self', in Mind and Knowledge: Essays in Honorof Norman Malcolm, ed. by Carl Ginet and Sydney Shoemaker, OxfordUniversity Press, 1983.
Nerlich, Graham. The Shape of Space. Cambridge University Press, 1976.
Niven, Larry. 'All the Myriad Ways', Galaxy (1968); reprinted in Niven, All theMyriad Ways, Ballantine Books, 1971.
Nock, 0. S. History of the Great Western Railway, volume III. Ian Allan,
1967.
Perry, John. 'Can the Self Divide?' Journal of Philosophy, 69 (1972), pp. 463-88.
Plantinga, Alvin. `Transworld Identity or Worldbound Individuals?' in Logicand Ontology, ed. by Milton Munitz, New York University Press (1973);
reprinted in Loux, The Possible and the Actual.
—The Nature of Necessity. Oxford University Press, 1974.
—'Actualism and Possible Worlds', Theoria, 42 (1976), pp. 139-60; reprintedin Loux, The Possible and the Actual.
Popper, Karl. 'Truth, Rationality, and the Growth of Scientific Knowledge',
in Popper, Conjectures and Refutations, Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1963.
Prior, Arthur N. Past, Present and Future. Clarendon, 1967.
—Objects of Thought. Clarendon, 1971.
—and Fine, Kit. Worlds, Times, and Selves. Duckworth, 1977.
Quine, Willard Van Orman. 'Propositional Objects' in Quine, OntologicalRelativity and Other Essays, Columbia University Press, 1969.
—'Worlds Away', Journal of Philosophy, 73 (1976), pp. 859-63; reprinted inQuine, Theories and Things, Harvard University Press, 1981.
Ramsey, Frank P. 'Theories', in Ramsey, The Foundations of Mathematics,
Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1931; and in Ramsey, Foundations, Routledgeand Kegan Paul, 1978.

Works Cited269Richards, Tom. 'The Worlds of David Lewis', Australasian Journal ofPhilosophy, 53 (1975), pp. 105-18.
Robinson, Denis. The Metaphysics of Material Constitution. Ph.D. dissertation,
Monash University, 1982.
Roper, Andrew. 'Toward an Eliminative Reduction of Possible Worlds', ThePhilosophical Quarterly, 32 (1982), pp. 45-59.
Salmon, Nathan. Reference and Essence. Princeton University Press, 1981.
Schlesinger, George N. 'Possible Worlds and the Mystery of Existence', Ratio,
26 (1984), pp. 1-17.
Sciama, Dennis W. 'Issues in Cosmology', in Some Strangeness in the Proportion:
A Centennial Symposium to Celebrate the Achievements of Albert Einstein,
ed. by Harry Woolf, Addison-Wesley, 1980.
Scriven, Michael. 'The Key Property of Physical Laws - Inaccuracy', in CurrentIssues in the Philosophy of Science, ed. by Herbert Feigl and GroverMaxwell, Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1961.
Shoemaker, Sydney. 'Causality and Properties', in Time and Cause: Essayspresented to Richard Taylor, ed. by Peter van Inwagen, Reidel, 1980.
Skyrms, Brian. 'Possible Worlds, Physics and Metaphysics', PhilosophicalStudies, 30 (1976), pp. 323-32.
—‘Tractarian Nominalism', Philosophical Studies, 40 (1981), pp. 199-206.
Slote, Michael. Metaphysics and Essence. Blackwell, 1975.
Smart, J. J. C. Ethics, Persuasion and Truth. Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1984.
Stalnaker, Robert. 'A Theory of Conditionals', in Studies in Logical Theory,
ed. by Nicholas Rescher, Blackwell, 1968.
—'Possible Worlds', Noiis, 10 (1976), pp. 65-75; reprinted in Loux, The Possibleand the Actual.
—Inquiry. MIT Press, 1984.
Stenius, Eric. 'Sets', Synthese, 27 (1974), pp. 161-88.
Stout, G. F. 'Are the Characteristics of Particular Things Universal or Particular?'
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, supplementary volume 3 (1923),
pp. 114-22.
Swoyer, Chris. 'The Nature of Natural Laws', Australasian Journal ofPhilosophy, 60 (1982), pp. 203-23.
Teller, Paul. 'A Poor Man's Guide to Supervenience and Determination',
Southern Journal of Philosophy, supplement to volume 22 (1984),
pp. 137-62.
Thomason, Richmond. 'Modal Logic and Metaphysics', in The Logical Wayof Doing Things, ed. by Karel Lambert, Yale University Press, 1969.
TichY, Pavel. 'On Popper's Definitions of Verisimilitude', British Journal forthe Philosophy of Science, 25 (1974), pp. 155-60.
Unger, Peter. 'Minimizing Arbitrariness: Toward a Metaphysics of InfinitelyMany Isolated Concrete Worlds', Midwest Studies in Philosophy, 9 (1984),
pp. 29-51.
van Fraassen, Bas C. 'The Only Necessity is Verbal Necessity', Journal ofPhilosophy, 74 (1977), pp. 71-85.
van Inwagen, Peter. 'Indexicality and Actuality', Philosophical Review, 89 (1980),
pp. 403-26.

270Works Cited—'The Doctrine of Arbitrary Undetached Parts', Pacific PhilosophicalQuarterly, 62 (1981), pp. 123-37.
—An Essay on Free Will. Clarendon, 1983.
—'Plantinga on Trans-World Identity', in Alvin Plantinga: A Profile, ed. byJames Tomberlin and Peter van Inwagen, Reidel, 1985.
Wiggins, David. 'On Being in the Same Place at the Same Time', PhilosophicalReview, 77 (1968), pp. 90-5.
Williams, Donald C. 'On the Elements of Being', Review of Metaphysics, 7(1953), pp. 3-18 and 171-92; reprinted in Williams, Principles of EmpiricalRealism, Charles Thomas, 1966.
—'Dispensing with Existence', Journal of Philosophy, 59 (1962), pp. 748-63.
—'Necessary Facts', Review of Metaphysics, 16 (1963), pp. 601-26.

Indexabstractness, 81-6, 110-11, 136, 143,168-9, 171-4, 178-80, 189accessibility, 7-8, 18-20, 27-30, 32,234-5, 239-41, 243, 246-8, 258-9,261-3accidental intrinsics, problem of,
199-202, 204-6, 242-3, 261, 263accommodation, rule of, 6, 8, 43,251-2, 255, 259actualism, 97-101, 103, 112, 118, 124,138actuality and actualisation, of ersatzindividuals, 238-9; of ersatzworlds, 137-9, 151-2, 167, 174-91;
of worlds, 5, 92-101, 129Adams, Robert M., viii, 93-4, 116,123, 126-7, 139, 160, 208-25, 233alien possibilities, 1-2, 60, 66, 67, 91-2,114, 159-65, 167, 178, 179, 190,191Anderson, John, 179Anscombe, G. E. M., 38anthropic principle, 132-3arbitrariness, 103, 113, 114, 128-33,224Armstrong, D. M., viii, 51, 64-8, 91,101-4, 190, 202Sealer, George, 60belief, 27-41Benacerraf, Paul, 108-9Bennett, John G., viii, 139Bennett, Jonathan, 26, 122Bigelow, John, viii, 26, 50, 122Black, Max, 51Boolos, George, 51branching and divergence of worlds,
7-8, 70-1, 125, 206-9Bricker, Phillip, viii, 144, 158, 175Bruce, 53, 166-7Burge, Tyler, 33Campbell, Keith C., 64, 65cardinality of worlds, 104-5, 118,143-4, 224Carnap, Rudolf, 49, 141, 144-5, 152,216, 237causation, 2, 14, 16, 22-3, 33-6, 58-9,78-81, 83-5, 108-13, 126-7,131-3, 172, 178-9, 218, 221Chandler, Hugh, 244, 246-8Chisholm, Roderick, 28, 243-8circularity, 154, 156-7classes, 50-1; see also setscloseness of worlds, 20-7, 62, 122closeness to truth, 34-7common sense opinion, 99-100, 133-5,137,140,176,184,189,195-7,199,207,209,220,227, 239-41,246-7, 262compartmentalised belief, 30-2, 34-6,39compossibility, of ersatz individuals,
150, 188, 238; of individuals, 1-2,271

272Indexcompossibility (cont.):
69-81, 208-9, 211-12, 230concern, 126-7concreteness, 81-6, 110-11, 136, 143,168-9, 171-4, 178-80, 189conservatism, 115, 128, 134-5, 235, 240consistency of ersatz worlds, 150-6,165, 167-8, 241-2, 260-1constitution, material, 252-3, 257content of attitudes, 27-41, 58-9, 63,104-8, 223counterfactual conditionals, 20-23, 24,37, 78-80, 111, 122, 123-4, 172counterpart relations,1, 6, 8, 9-13,32-3, 37, 49, 69, 70-1, 88-9,124-6, 194-7, 202, 203, 213-20,225, 231-5, 243, 245-8, 254-63;
ersatz, 237-9, 247, 260; intran-
sitivity of, 219, 245-6, 248; multi-
plicity of, 8, 214, 232, 243, 248,254-61; non-qualitative, 77, 229-30,242, 247, 259-60Cresswell, M. J., viii, 35, 42, 50, 148Davies, Martin, 104-5deceptive worlds, 116-23, 209degrees of belief, 30-2, 36-7de se attitudes, 28-30, 54-5, 105, 125-8divergence and branching of worlds,
7-8, 70-1, 125, 206-9doublethink, 30-2, 34-6, 39doxastic alternatives, 28-41, 234Dummett, Michael, 82duplication, 59, 61-3, 81, 82, 89, 91,205; of tropes, 64-6; see also diver-
gence and branching of worlds;
eternal recurrence; indiscernibles;
recombination; supervenienceegocentricity, 28-30, 54-5, 105, 125-8elements, 174-91, 195, 224Ellis, Brian, 27ersatz individuals, 137-8, 147, 148-50,157-8, 167, 168-9, 170-1, 187-90,237-9, 260ersatz times, 204ersatz worlds, 136-91, 193-8, 200, 202,208, 221, 224-5; combinatorial,
74, 146, 152, 164-5; concrete, 148;
linguistic, 7, 19-20, 90-1, 141,142-65, 167, 170, 174, 175, 186,187, 190-1, 195, 197, 224-5, 226,235-9, 260-1; magical, 141, 161,165, 174-91, 195, 224, 225, 235,247; mathematical, 90-1, 147-8,152, 217; pictorial, 141, 165-74,175-6, 187, 191, 195, 225, 235;
Ramsified, 161-5, 237Escher, M. C., 168essence, 8-13, 192-263Etchemendy, John, 145eternal recurrence, 28, 39, 63, 84, 87,102, 157-8, 170-1, 172, 227-8,232, 236, 237, 259events, 23, 78-9, 83-4, 95existence, according to a world, 96,194-6, 198-9, 213, 214, 217, 222,243; actual, 94-6; at a world, 5-7,10-11, 198; contingency of, 10-13;
manners of, 2-3explanation, 73-4, 128-33Feldman, Fred, 254Field, Hartry, 109Fine, Kit, 183Forbes, Graeme, 10-12, 246Forrest, Peter, viii, 87, 101-4, 116,118-21, 183functionalist theory of content, 36-40,106-8future, unreality of the, 204, 207-9Gale, George, 132Geach, Peter, 248Gibbard, Allan, 216, 248, 256global and local character, 14-16, 153,155-6, 168-70, 241Glymour, Clark, 27Goodman, Nelson, 64, 66, 69grammars, 40-50grand worlds, 80, 100-1, 124Grandy, Richard, 39Grieve, James, 77Haack, Susan, 98haecceities, 65, 160, 220, 225

Index273haecceitism, 158-9, 198, 199, 220-48,259-62; extreme and moderate,
239-43, 247-8, 261-2Hazen, Allen, viii, 13, 52, 94, 232-4Hilbert, David, 3Hilpinen, Risto, 24-6Hintikka, Jaakko, 18, 27, 216Hume, David, 87, 91, 181, 210Humean supervenience, 14, 16Hunter, Graeme, 12idealisations, 4, 26-7, 166identity, 192-3, 261; contingent, 253,256, 259, 262-3; see also overlapof worlds; persistence throughtime; trans-world individualsimagination, as test for possibility, 90,113-15impossible individuals, 211; see alsotrans-world individualsimpossible worlds, 1, 7, 151, 165inconsistent belief, 34-6, 73inconstancy of representation de re, 8,45, 198, 223-4, 243, 248-63indifference to morality and prudence,
123-8indiscernibles, 62-3, 83-4, 87, 119,157-8, 165, 170-1, 172, 185, 191,222, 224-5, 227, 237, 239, 244; seealso duplicationindividual concepts, 216individual possibilities, 230-5, 243,248, 258-9, 260; see also ersatzindividuals; possible individualsinduction, fallibility of, 116-18, 121intuition, see common sense opinionisolation of worlds, 1-2, 69-81, 211-12Jackson, Frank C., 156-7Jeffrey, Richard C., 141, 142, 143-4Johnson, David, 70Johnston, Mark, viii, 64, 65, 126, 145,202, 205-6joint possibilities, 52, 232-5, 238, 259,263Kanger, Stig, 18Kaplan, David, viii, 104-5, 195, 216,220-1Kim, Jaegwon, 15knowledge, 27-8, 30, 93-4, 103, 108-15Kratzer, Angelika, 8Kripke, Saul, viii, 18, 33-6, 80, 88,195-6, 222-3, 225-7, 252Lagadonian languages, 145-6, 152,159-61, 165, 190-1, 197, 236laws of nature, 1-2, 7-8, 14, 16, 20, 24,63, 91-2, 114, 128-33, 155, 161-3,180Leibniz, viii, 93, 145Leonard, Henry S., 69Leslie, John, 132Lewis, C. 1., 49Lewis, C. S., 140local and global character, 14-16, 153,155-6, 168-70, 241logic, neutrality of, 105logical-space ships, 80-1Lycan, William, 98-9, 108, 158McGinn, Colin, 114McMichael, Alan, 237match of origins, 71, 88, 194, 231,244-5, 252, 255, 257mathematics, 3-4, 51, 90, 103, 108-15,137, 146-8, 153-4meanings, 40-50, 56-7Meinong, Alexius, 97, 98Meredith, C. A., 18mereology, 69, 94, 172, 193, 199, 203,211-13, 216Miller, David, 25miniworlds, 20, 141, 143-4, 225-7, 237mirroring, 149-50, 238modality, 5-20, 98, 100; in cross-worldcomparisons, 13-14; de re, 8-13,192-263; epistemic and doxastic,
27-9; numerical, 13; primitive,
13-14, 17, 150-7, 164, 167-70,176, 179, 191, 238, 241-2; insupervenience, 14-17modal logic, 8-9, 17-20, 216, 253-4modal operators, 8-9, 17-20; express-
ive limitations of, 12-17, 253-4models (model-theoretic), 144, 145,152, 153-4

274Indexmodels (scale), 141, 166, 194Mondadori, Fabrizio, 196-7Montague, Richard, 18, 42, 54morality, 123-8Nagel, Thomas, 232names, acquaintance by way of, 33-4;
descriptive, 236-7, 250-1, 256,260; evocative, 249-51, 253,255-9, 262; in linguistic ersatzworlds, 158, 195, 236-7, 241-2,260-1; Lagadonian, 145-6, 152,159-61, 165, 190-1, 197, 236;
quasi-rigid, 6, 256-7; tendentious,
174, 178, 184, 186, 188, 189-90;
fOr trans-world individuals, 215naturalism, ethical, 16-17Nerlich, Graham, 76Niven, Larry, 124-5Nock, 0. S., 249nothing, possibility of, 73-4Occam's razor, 116, 119-23origins, see match of originsoverlap of worlds, 2, 9, 69, 193, 194,196, 198-209, 210, 223, 228-9,235, 242-3, 261-3Peacocke, Christopher, 104Perry, John, 70persistence through time, 29, 38, 41,53, 81, 126, 202-4, 210, 217-20Plantinga, Alvin, 141, 183, 192plenitude of possibilities, 86-92Popper, Karl, 25possible individuals, 8, 28-41, 69-70,86-92, 130, 148, 171, 185, 211,230-5, 258-60potentiality, 8-13, 192-263predetermination, 8, 70, 128, 208-9primitive modality, 13-14, 17, 150-7,164, 167-70, 176, 179, 191, 238,241-2Prior, Arthur N., 183properties, 50-69, 160-1, 225; asabstractions from predicates, 161,190; as abstract simple elements,
161, 187-91; abundant and sparse,
59-69, 190; alien, 1-2, 60, 66, 67,91-2, 114, 159-65, 167, 178, 179,190, 191; ascription of, 29, 33, 35,58-9, 66; extrinsic, 16, 59, 61-3,85, 88-9, 149, 157, 171, 199-202,205, 218, 230; and forms, 190;
intrinsic, 14, 16, 60, 61-3, 76, 77,88-9, 149, 157, 176-82, 186-7,188, 199-206, 210, 221, 242-3,263; natural, 60-9, 77, 89, 108,182, 221, 229; relations misde-
scribed as, 52-4, 189, 201; rep-
resentational, 177-9, 184, 188,191; as sets of instances, 50-69,95, 189, 190, 225; shared in pic-
torial representation, 166-7,168-70, 171; structural, 62, 68, 87,183-7, 189; structured, 55-7,59-60, 189; and tropes, 64-9,161, 189-90; turned into relations,
200-1, 204, 210, 228, 235, 242-3,261, 263; uninstantiated, 160-1,190-1; and universals, 64-9, 161,189-90propositions, 29, 34-5, 104-6; asabstract simple elements, 183-7,189; abundant and sparse, 61;
cardinality of, 107; egocentric, 54,185; relations misdescribed as, 54;
as sets of worlds, 53-55, 95,104-6, 175, 185, 187; singular,
57-9; structured, 57-9, 185prudence, 124-8, 219psychophysical supervenience, 14-16,223-4, 226qualitative character of worlds, 22; andrepresentation de re, 220-48quantification, bogus, 164; Meinongian,
98-9; noncommital, 183; plural,
51; in Ramsified ersatz worlds,
161-5, 237; restricted, 3, 5-7, 13,17, 133, 136-8, 164, 198, 205, 207,211, 213, 239-40Quine, Willard V., 4, 90-1, 141, 147,217-8Ramsey, Frank P., 162Ramsified ersatz worlds, 161-5, 237

Index275realism, viiirecombination,69,87-92,101-4,113-15, 116,143,159, 163,180-1,205relations, abundant and sparse, 61,67-8; of acquaintance, 33-6,58-9, 108-13; constitutive, 179;
external, 62-3, 75, 76-8, 79-80,176, 179-82, 188, 191, 200, 205-6,208, 221, 230, 242-3, 261, 263;
internal, 62, 176-9, 182, 188, 191;
misdescribed as properties, 52-4,189, 201; misdescribed as prop-
ositions, 54; natural, 67-8, 74-5,76-7, 221; properties turned into,
200-1, 204, 210, 228, 235, 242-3,261, 263; of selection, 174-91; assets of instances, 52; of similarity.
13, 62, 176-7, 209, 254-5; spatio-
temporal, 62, 67, 70-8, 83-5, 172,176, 179-81, 208-9; structured,
56-7, 59; and tropes, 67-8, 75;
and universals, 67-8, 75relative possibility, 247-8; see alsoaccessibilityrepresentation, de re, 194-6, 198-9,205, 206, 217, 221-4, 226-39, 245,247, 248-63; explicit and im-
plicit, 142, 150, 151-6, 168-70,195; linguistic, 141, 142-8, 174;
magical, 141, 174-5, 188, 247;
mathematical, 146-8; by name,
158, 195, 236-7, 241-2, 260-1;
pictorial, 141, 166-7, 174representational properties, 177-9, 184,188, 191resemblance, see similarityrestricting modifiers, 5-7, 124Richards, Tom, 70, 98, 99, 108, 114Robinson, Denis, 248, 257Roper, Andrew, 144, 153-4Salmon, Nathan, 244, 245, 246scepticism, 111, 114-23, 125Schlesinger, George N., 116, 128Sciama, Dennis W., 132Striven, Michael, 27Seager, William, 12selection of elements, 174-91semantic values, 40-50, 104sets, 3-4, 50-1, 83-5, 94-5, 104, 137,143, 144, 172; see also mathematics;
properties; propositions; relationsShoemaker, Sydney, 162similarity, 13, 62, 176-7, 209, 254-5;
see also closeness of worlds;
counterpart relations; duplication;
indiscernibles; match of origins;
variety as a measure of sizeSkyrms, Brian, 99, 100-101, 110, 141,146, 158, 164-5, 237Slott, Michael, 183Smart, J. J. C., 116, 128space and time, alternative theories of,
76; Newtonian and relativistic,
74-5, 206; possible sizes andshapes of, 72-3, 89-90, 101-3,114, 130, 209speaking with the vulgar, 164, 217,240-1, 247spirits, unlocated, 73stages, see persistence through time;
trans-world individualsStalnaker, Robert, viii, 2, 21-2, 28, 30,34, 36, 87, 136, 139, 141, 144, 183state-descriptions, 144-5, 152, 154-5,237states of affairs, 183-7Stenius, Eric, 51stipulational worlds, 234; see also jointpossibilitiesStout, G. F., 64structural properties, 62, 68, 87, 183-7,189structure-descriptions, 237supervenience, 14-17, 62, 146, 147,221-4, 226-7Swoyer, Chris, 162telescopes, trans-world, 80, 114, 183,196Teller, Paul, 14temporal parts, see persistence throughtimetemporary intrinsics, problem of,
202-5, 210

276Indextendentious names, 174, 178, 184, 186,188, 189-90theory, improvement of, 3-5, 109, 111,115, 134-5, 156-7, 184, 240Thomason, Richmond, 216Tichy, Pavel, viii, 25, 239trans-world individuals, 9, 69-70, 96,193, 197, 202, 203, 210-20, 229tropes, 64-9, 82, 85-6, 92, 145, 161,189-90, 205-6truth conditions, 40-8truthlikeness, 24-7Unger, Peter, 128-33, 224unification of worlds, 1-2, 69-81,208-9, 211-12, 230universals, 2, 64-9, 70, 82-6, 92, 95,145-6, 159-61, 171-2, 189-90,204-5, 209utilitarianism, 127-8vagueness, 212-13, 244; see alsoinconstancy of representationde revan Fraassen, Bas C., 48van Inwagen, Peter, viii, 86, 87, 94, 98,140, 183, 192, 194, 248variety as a measure of size, 26, 122verisimilitude, 24-7von Stechow, Arnim, 35ways things might be, 13, 86-7, 183-7,188-9Wiggins, David, 248Williams, D. C., 64-9, 93, 123Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 145, 146world-bound individuals, 214; see alsopossible individualsworld-like parts of worlds, 72-3, 81,125, 129, 132, 209worldmates, see compossibility

